# To cut the patient's blood - breaking blood stagnation
136 Wang Bing: “決 is to say: 決破其血, ‘to cut the [patient’s] blood.’ Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /58: “ ‘When the blood is replete’ refers to signs of stagnating blood. 決 is to dissolve blockages in water; here it refers to methods transforming or breaking up stagnations.” In contrast, Gao Jiwu/13 interprets 決之, lit. “to cut off,” as a reference to bloodletting. see also Gao Jiwu/158 for further support of this argument. In contrast, Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./115: “one must stimulate the movement of the blood to eliminate the evil.”

# Cold causing stagnation
52 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: the passage of the blood is not free.” Zhang Jiebin: “When wind and cold attack [the body] from outside, the blood coagulates in the vessels. as a result the vessel paths are blocked and this means disease.” 2685/45: “The character 泣 has three different readings in the Nei jing. The first is qi and refers to tears. another is identical in pronunciation and meaning with 澀, ‘rough.’ The third is li and refers to stagnation of blood and qi. yu yue 俞樾 suggested that 泣 is an error for 冱, ‘frozen,’ ‘congealed.’ The element 互 constituting the right side of the character was erroneously written as 立.” 2753/61: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ”

When cold qi settles in the region between the small intestine and the mem- brane plain, in the blood of the network [vessels], the [flow of the] blood is impeded and cannot pour into the large conduits. The blood and the qi stagnate and cannot pass. Hence, [the blood and the qi] stay [at one location] for a long time and generate ac- cumulations.31


52 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: the passage of the blood is not free.” Zhang Jiebin: “When wind and cold attack [the body] from outside, the blood coagulates in the vessels. as a result the vessel paths are blocked and this means disease.” 2685/45: “The character 泣 has three different readings in the Nei jing. The first is qi and refers to tears. another is identical in pronunciation and meaning with 澀, ‘rough.’ The third is li and refers to stagnation of blood and qi. yu yue 俞樾 suggested that 泣 is an error for 冱, ‘frozen,’ ‘congealed.’ The element 互 constituting the right side of the character was erroneously written as 立.” 2753/61: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ”

## Trauma
Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever the sinews and bones are injured, regardless of whether blood appears or not, the blood will coagulate and the conduits will become blocked. When the qi and the blood are coagulated and blocked, the physical appearance will swell and show fullness as if there were dampness qi in the conduits and this will be similar to being struck by water.” Tanba believes that the en- tire passage from 帝曰: 有故病 to 若中水也 does not fit with the preceding and the following text. Hence he assumes that some text was erroneously omitted. Zhang Qi: “The six character passage beginning with 不見血 is an erroneous insertion.” 2855/54: “What connection could exist between ‘blood is already visible’ and ‘dampness?’ 濕 may be an error for 澀, ‘rough.’ for instance, Ling shu 36 has 氣濕不行 and this is 氣澀不行 in the Tai su. also, 已 has the meaning of ‘to eliminate.’ There should be a stop behind 已, with the entire sentence reading as follows: 當病毀傷, 不見血, 已, 見血, 澀若中水也, ‘he should suffer from an injury. If no blood is visible, this can be healed. If blood is visible this may reach a situation where the passage of qi and blood is rough, similar to being hit by water qi.’ ”

# Misleading treatment
43 Wang Bing: “When the conduit vessels are full, there is an overflow in the net- work vessels. When there is an overflow in the network vessels, the [patient] is to be needled misleadingly to regulate his network vessels, so that his physical appearance returns to its original condition, with no swelling. Hence [the text] states: ‘apply a misleading piercing to restore his physical appearance.’ ” Zhang Jiebin: “Then one car- ries out a misleading piercing in that one choses the left [side for piercing] to treat the right and choses the right [side for piercing] to treat the left. This way the stagnations in the large network [vessels] are eliminated.”

# treatment
34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there are obstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

68 Wang Bing: “When the disease is transmitted misleadingly and pulls on the upper teeth and in case the teeth and lips are cold and have pain, pierce the yang brilliance network on the back of the hand.” Zhang Zhicong: “one must first inspect the vessels on the back of the hand and eliminate the [blood] from those where blood stagnates. This is to drain evil from the branches of the hand yang brilliance conduits.”


377 Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./117: “That is, even though there are signs of diar- rhea, drugs causing diarrhea are employed nevertheless. When heat evil has accumu- lated in the intestines, it is drained by [drugs] stimulating a passage downward. as soon as the heat has left with cold drugs draining it downward, the diarrhea comes to an end.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /60: “for example, [uterine] flooding and spotting caused by stagnating blood are to be treated by patterns transforming sta- sis.”


34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there are obstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

## Herbs
 The ancient Ben cao jing 本草經 states: ‘ black cuttlefisch bones, salty flavor, cold-balanced [nature], no toxicity. Main indication: blockage of bleeding of women. Madder, acrid flavor, cold-balanced, slight toxicity. Main indication: disperses bad blood. sparrow eggs, sweet flavor, warm-bal- anced, no toxicity. Indication: strengthens the yin [member] in case of weakness and makes it rise. Provides heat, plenty of [seminal] essence, so that one has offspring. 鮑 魚, acrid flavor, stench, warm-balanced, no toxicity. Main indication: stagnating blood, blocked blood in the four limbs which does not disperse.” 

# Blood in the stool
48 Wang Bing: “Because the yin controls the blood.” Zhongyi yanjiuyuan...: “evil qi conglomerates in the yin conduits. When the yin network vessels receive harm, blood passes down with the stools.” Cheng shide et al.: “The Sheng ji zong lu 聖濟總錄 states: ‘In case of evil [qi] in the five depots, the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious. When the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious, then bloods stagnates in it. Diseases of conglomerated yin result from internal conglomerations of yin qi, keeping it from moving outside. Blood enters the intestines. Hence there is blood in the stool.’ Conglomeration of yin is to say, then: conglomeration of blood in the yin vessels. Zhang Jiebin stated: ‘In mild cases the stool has one pint of blood. This way the conglomeration evil is set free. If not and if there is a second conglomeration, then the stool has two pints. (etc.)’”

# Theory
## Too much salt
16 Wang Bing: “The heart is related to the [movement in the] vessels; its splendor appears in in the complexion. salty [flavor] benefits the kidneys, [and makes them] dominate the heart. The heart cannot prosper. Hence the [movement in the] vessels congeals and stagnates and the complexion changes.” Zhang Jiebin: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ” Zhang yizhi et al.: “泣 is identical to 立, ‘to stand.’ The character 泣 is an error here; it should be 立.”

## Cold
544 Zhang Jiebin: “all these are illnesses caused by cold and water. fire fears water. Hence the heart aches. Cold enters the kidneys. Hence the lower back and the but- tocks have pain. Qi and blood stagnate under the influence of cold, sinews and vessels become tense. Hence the joints do not move freely, stretching and bending are not comfortable. The yin qi dominates and the yang qi fails to move. Hence [patients experience] recession with countermovement, blockages and hardenings, as well as abdominal fullness.”


53 Wang Bing: “厥 is to say: the feet are cold because of ceasing [qi].” Zhang Jiebin: “The four limbs are the basis of all yang. When wind and cold settle here and when the blood coagulates in the feet, then the yang weakens and the yin flourishes. at the same time, the qi moves [upwards] contrary [to its normal course] and this is ceasing.” Zhang Zhicong: “When the yin qi and the yang qi fail to interact, this is ‘ceasing.’ The lower parts are yin and the blood is yin. When the blood coagulates in the lower parts, then the yin and the yang of the upper and the lower parts do no longer interact and this is ‘ceasing.’ ” Cheng shide et al./165: “This comment is based on chapter 厥陰 in the Shang han lun 傷寒論.”


55 Wang Bing: “If there is only a little blood, the vessels are empty and as a conse- quence visitor cold enters. Cold makes the blood liquid coagulate. Hence the color of the vessels is bluish.”

42 Wang Bing: “When the blood congeals and is impeded, then it turns bad. Hence, the color is green-blue or black and as a result [the patient] feels pain.”

49 li Zhongzi: “In the case of cold, the blood qi coagulates. Hence, there is pain.”


## The Heart
61 Wang Bing: “The heart nourishes the blood; it rules the [movement in the] ves- sels. Hence [the text states]: ‘Its fullness [manifests itself ] in the blood vessels.’ ” In contrast, yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/37: “Because the heart rules the blood and the vessels, the heart is able to cause fullness and repletion in respect of the blood and its vessels.”

42 Wang Bing: “The vessels are the palaces of the blood. Su wen 23 states: ‘If one beholds [something] for long, this harms the blood.’ from this it is evident that all vessels are tied to the eyes.” Gao shishi: “The five depots are located in the interior and the qi passes through the entire body. ‘all vessels’ refers to the vessel paths by which the blood vessels pass through the entire body. The essence brilliance of the five depots moves upwards and pours into the eyes. Hence all vessels are tied to the eyes.” Wu Kun: “To prove this with the [courses of the] conduit vessels: The vessels of the blad- der emerge from the inner canthi. The vessels of the stomach interconnect with the eyebrows. The vessels of the gallbladder emerge from the outer canthi. The vessels of the triple burner reach to the outer canthi. also, the vessels of the heart are connected with the eye connection; the vessels of the liver are linked to the eye connection. That is, all vessels are tied to the eyes.” 137/15: “The character 目 should be 腎, ‘kidneys.’ ” Zhang yizhi et al.: “屬于目 is 注于目, ‘[all vessels] pour into the eyes.’ ”

45 Wang Bing: “The blood resides inside the vessels; it is tied to the heart. Su wen 26 states: ‘Blood and qi are man’s spirit. The spirit, though, is the ruler of the heart.’ from this it is evident that all the blood is tied to the heart.” 

48 Wang Bing: “The liver stores the blood; the heart makes it pass. When a person moves, the blood travels through all the conduits. When a person rests, the blood re- turns to the liver depot. Why this is so? Because the liver rules the sea of blood.”

When someone has lied down and then walks out and wind blows at him and when the blood congeals in the skin, this is block.51 When it congeals in the vessels, this is retarded flow.52 When it congeals in the feet, this is receding [qi].53 In these three cases, the blood has passed but cannot return to the void it [has left].54 Hence [this] leads to block and receding [qi].

50 Wang Bing: “When the qi passes, the blood flows. Hence one can walk when the feet receive blood.”

## Obstructions


4 Wang Bing: “菀 is 積, ‘accumulation.’ 陳 is 久, ‘old.’ 除 is 去, ‘to remove.’ That is to say, when blood has accumulated in the network vessels for a long time, one pierces [these vessels] with a needle and removes it.” 971/56: “This makes it very clear that the phrase 去宛陳 (in Su wen 14) is a therapy whereby blood is let by piercing the network vessels.” see also 1617/35, 919/1, and 117/38.

11 Wang Bing: “ ‘small and tense’ refers to extreme cold. When there is no drum- ming, then the blood does not flow. When the blood does not flow and when cold gathers, the blood coagulates internally and causes conglomeration ills as a result.” Ma shi: “瘕 is 假, ‘unreal.’ The lump seems to have form; its disappearance or visibility are irregular. Hence, it is called 瘕. The vessels themselves are tense. If now within this tension they are also small and if they do not drum against one’s hand, then they are in the depth. There must be a conglomeration inside.” Mori: “瘕 is a conglomeration, caused be an internal knotting of water and blood. Hence, the [Zhu] bing yuan [hou lun] 諸病源候論 states: 瘕 diseases are caused by an imbalance of cold and warmth. Beverages and food are not digested and they strike against the qi of the depots, form- ing accumulations in the abdomen, with tangible lumps. They move together with the qi and they are named because of their elusiveness. Hence, [the text] states: ‘are [signs of ] conglomeration ills.’ ”Yu pian 玉篇: “瘕 are diseases in the abdomen.”

34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there areobstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

68 Wang Bing: “When blood stagnates [in the tertiary network vessels] pierce [the vessels] and let it [flow away].” lin yi et al.: “The Jia yi jing does not have the two characters 孫絡, ‘tertiary.’ ”

When the qi is determined, one [can] pierce the [patient].5 Hence, when heaven is warm and when the sun is bright, then the blood in man is rich in fluid,6 and the guard qi is at the surface. {Hence, the blood can be drained easily and the qi can be made to move on easily.} When heaven is cold and when the sun is hidden, then the blood in man congeals so that [its flow] is impeded,7 and the guard qi is in the depth. 26-164-6 at the time of beginning crescent moon, blood and qi originate as essence,8 and the guard qi begins to move.


6 Zhang Jiebin: “淖 is 濡潤, ‘rich.’ When the sky is warm and the sun shines, the yang abounds and the yin is weak. The blood and the qi in man correspond to this. Hence the blood is imbued with liquid and is drained easily. The guard qi is at the surface and moves easily. When the sky is cold and the sun is hidden, the yang is weak and the yin abounds. Hence man’s blood congeals and the guard qi is in the depth. When [the blood] is congealed, it is difficult to drain it. When [the guard qi] is in the depth, it has difficulties to move.” Zhongyi yanjiuyuan...: “淖 has the meaning of 滑 潤, ‘smooth.’ ” yu Chang: “淖液 stands for 潮汐, ‘morning tides and evening tides.’ ” Mori: “淖液 stands for 淖澤, in the sense of 滋潤, ‘rich.’ yang shangshan interprets 液 as 津液; that is wrong.”

9 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: 血行不行, ‘the blood flow does not flow.’ ” Zhang Jiebin agrees. Ma shi: “泣 is read 澀, ‘rough.’ ” yu yue and 2588/23: “The character 泣 should be the character 冱, ‘to freeze,’ ‘to congeal.’ ” for detailed discussions of this argument, see there.

now, when evil enters the vessels, if it is cold, then the blood congeals so that [its flow] is impeded. If it is summerheat, then the qi is saturated with moisture.11 When subsequently a depletion evil enters [the vessels] and settles [there], then this, too, is similar to when the main waters are affected by wind: 12 The arrival of the vessel movement in the conduits, at times it, too, rises [like] the ridges [in the fields].13 Its passage in the vessels is continuous.14

below the membrane plain,21 and the blood cannot disperse,22 the small network [vessels] become tense and pull and, hence, there is pain. When one presses [the location of the pain], then the blood and the qi dis- perse. Hence, pressing it ends the pain.


22 Wang Bing: “ ‘The blood cannot disperse’ refers to the blood inside the small net- work vessels within the diaphragm membrane. When the network [vessels] are full, they are tense. Hence they pull and pain develops. When one presses them with one’s hand, then the cold qi disperses and the small network [vessels] relax. Hence the pain stops.” The Tai su has 而, ‘and,’ instead of 血, ‘ blood.’ ” Mori: “This passage should be read following the wording in the Tai su. The occurrence of the character for ‘ blood’ in the current version is a mistake. Because Wang Bing used a version with that mistaken writing, he added the character 血 in the subsequent statement.”

39-220-4 When cold qi settles in the ceasing yin vessel, {the ceasing yin vessel encloses the yin (i.e., sexual) organ and is tied to the liver} when cold qi settles in this vessel, then the [flow of the] blood is impeded and the vessel becomes tense. Hence, the ribs in the flanks and the lower abdomen pull each other [causing] pain.27 When receding qi28 settles in the yin (i.e., inner side of the) thighs,29 cold qi rises into the lower abdomen. The [flow of the] blood is impeded in the lower [region]. [above and below] pull each other.

Hence, the abdomen has pain, pulling on the yin (i.e., inner side of the) thighs.30 When cold qi settles in the region between the small intestine and the mem- brane plain, in the blood of the network [vessels], the [flow of the] blood is impeded and cannot pour into the large conduits. The blood and the qi stagnate and cannot pass. Hence, [the blood and the qi] stay [at one location] for a long time and generate ac- cumulations.31

31 Wang Bing: “That is to say, the blood coagulates because of the cold qi and gener- ates accumulations.” Zhang yizhi et al.: “The Tai su, ch. 27, has 卒然, ‘sudden,’ instead of 宿昔. This should be followed.” Mori: “宿昔 stands for 昨昔, ‘yesterday night.’ ”

