

# Stagnation
58 Wang Bing: “The nine orifices are linked internally to the depots; externally they constitute officials [of the depots]. Hence, when the qi in the five depots enter into a struggle, then the nine orifices are impassable. When [the text] speaks of ‘nine ori- fices,’ this is to say: the front yin [orifice] and the back yin [orifice, that is, the orifices of stools and urine] are impassable. at the same time it refers to the seven orifices [in the head], that is, the eyes are the officials of the liver; the nose is the official of the lung; the mouth is the official of the spleen; the ears are the officials of the kidneys; the tongue is the official of the heart. The tongue, though, is not a passable orifice. The Jin gui zhen yan lun 金匱真言論 states: ‘The red color of the south enters and penetrates the heart; its orifices are the ears. The black color of the north enters and penetrates the kidneys; their orifices are the two yin [openings].” 1580/4: “爭 is a simplified version of 靜, ‘quiet,’‘at peace.’ It has the meaning of ‘stagnation.’ The preceding sentence states that pathological changes towards an abundance of yang cause heat and move- ment. This sentence states that pathological changes towards a unilateral dominance of yin qi causes stillstand and blockages. When the yin is abundant, the faculties of the five depots weaken and a situation of blockages and impassability emerges. Hence [the text] states: ‘the nine orifices are impassable.’ ” In contrast, 4/37: “The interpreta- tion of the passage 五藏氣爭 by previous authors has mostly not been helpful. The Shuo wen 說文 states: ‘爭 has the meaning of 引, ‘to pull.’ Whenever the term 爭 is used it means that something is pulled to return to oneself.’ With this, the meaning of 五藏氣爭 is not difficult to explain. The meaning of 五藏氣爭 is 五藏爭氣. and which qi is pulled? It is the yang qi competed for by the five depots. 陽不勝其陰, 則 五藏氣爭九竅不通 is to say, when the body’s yin abounds while the yang is depleted, the five depots, abounding with yin, compete for the insufficient yang qi and from this results that the functions of the five depots are not in mutual balance. The nine orifices are connected with the five depots through the conduits and vessels and they depend on the warmth provided by the yang qi and on the moist nourishment provided by the yin qi of the five depots. now that the five depots compete with each other for yang qi, the balance is unobtainable and the nine orifices lose their functions.”

136 Wang Bing: “決 is to say: 決破其血, ‘to cut the [patient’s] blood.’ Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /58: “ ‘When the blood is replete’ refers to signs of stagnating blood. 決 is to dissolve blockages in water; here it refers to methods transforming or breaking up stagnations.” In contrast, Gao Jiwu/13 interprets 決之, lit. “to cut off,” as a reference to bloodletting. see also Gao Jiwu/158 for further support of this argument. In contrast, Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./115: “one must stimulate the movement of the blood to eliminate the evil.”

52 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: the passage of the blood is not free.” Zhang Jiebin: “When wind and cold attack [the body] from outside, the blood coagulates in the vessels. as a result the vessel paths are blocked and this means disease.” 2685/45: “The character 泣 has three different readings in the Nei jing. The first is qi and refers to tears. another is identical in pronunciation and meaning with 澀, ‘rough.’ The third is li and refers to stagnation of blood and qi. yu yue 俞樾 suggested that 泣 is an error for 冱, ‘frozen,’ ‘congealed.’ The element 互 constituting the right side of the character was erroneously written as 立.” 2753/61: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ”

43 Wang Bing: “When the conduit vessels are full, there is an overflow in the net- work vessels. When there is an overflow in the network vessels, the [patient] is to be needled misleadingly to regulate his network vessels, so that his physical appearance returns to its original condition, with no swelling. Hence [the text] states: ‘apply a misleading piercing to restore his physical appearance.’ ” Zhang Jiebin: “Then one car- ries out a misleading piercing in that one choses the left [side for piercing] to treat the right and choses the right [side for piercing] to treat the left. This way the stagnations in the large network [vessels] are eliminated.”

34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there are obstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

17 Gao shishi: “When cold is in the bones, the disease is called ‘ bone stagnation.’ ” Guo Tian: “痺 is 不通, ‘impassable.’ ” 

73 Wang Bing: “In case of a harm caused by cold coming from the outside, when the poison collects in all yang [conduits] inside and when cold abounds in the [body’s] exterior, then the skin contracts. When the skin has contracted, then the interstice structures are tightly closed. Hence, the guard qi accumulates and has no way to flow. The cold qi accumulates in the exterior and the yang qi struggles inside. The col- lected fire burns inside; hence, this generates ‘external heat.’” Zhang Jiebin: “The qi of the upper burner rules the yang section. Hence, in case of external harm caused by cold evil, the upper burner is no longer passable. The outside of the muscle [flesh] is closed and the guard qi accumulates through stagnation. It can flow nowhere and causes external heat. When it is said ‘when someone is harmed by cold, then he suf- fers from heat,’ this is a pathocondition caused by an affection from the outside.” Gao shishi: “The yang rules the above and it rules the exterior. When the upper burner is not freely passable, then the skin in the exterior closes tightly and, hence, internally the interstice structures are blocked and the dark palaces are not passable. as for the ‘interstice structures,’ these are the line structures of the interstices in the flesh. as for the ‘dark palaces,’ these are the sweat holes of the hair openings. When the dark palaces, the skin and the interstice structures do not [allow] communication among each other, then the guard qi is blocked and cannot flow away. Hence, there is yang abundance and external heat as a result.”

Wind and cold rise together.150 Herbs and trees blossom and are beautiful.151 They flourish but do not bear fruits; their maturing is incomplete.152 Its qi is dispersion. Its operation [manifests itself in] resting and stabilisation.153 The movement it [generates causes] ulcers, gushing up, cracking, welling yong- abscesses, and swelling.154 The effusion it [generates causes] sogginess and stagnation.155 70-431-3 Its depot is the spleen. Its tree-fruit are plum and chestnut.156 Its fruit [are those with] moisture and kernel.157 Its grain are bean and sesame.158 Its flavors are sour and sweet.159 Its colors are greenish and yellow.160 Its domestic animals are ox and dog.161 Its creatures are naked and hairy.162 It is responsible for the effusion of raging tornados and shaking.163 Its tones are gong and jue.164 Its illnesses are stagnation, fullness, and constipation.165 {These are transformations resulting from [the qi of ] wood.}166

70-434-2 an arrangement of dried-up flow, that is to say: rebelling yang.198 The [seasonal] command of storing is not put forth, [but] the qi of transformation prospers.199 The qi of growth is widely promulgated. The hibernating creatures do not hide.200 The soil is moist and the water fountains decrease. Herbs and trees grow tall and are lush; they blossom and flourish to full completion.201

70-434-4 Its qi is stagnation. Its operation [manifests itself in] seeping outflow. The movement it [generates causes] firmness and stoppage.202 The effusion it [generates causes] dryness and withering.203 Its depot are the kidneys. Its tree-fruit are dates and apricots.204 Its fruit [are those with] moisture and flesh.205 Its grain are glutinous millet and panicled millet.206 Its flavors are sweet and salty.207 Its colors are yellow and dark.208 Its domestic animals are the swine and the ox.209 Its creatures are scaly and naked.210 It is responsible for dust [causing] dense [air], [resulting in] a dark screen.211 Its tones are yu and gong.

293 Zhang Jiebin: “These are illnesses [caused by] heat.” fang yaozhong: “寒熱 is: fever with an aversion to cold; here it refers to malaria. 飲發 is 水飲發作, ‘water drink (i.e., stagnation of water in the body) develops.’ some of these conditions are associ- ated with dampness and heat, some are associated with cold and dampness. In a year when the minor yin [qi, i.e.,] ruler fire, controls heaven and yang brilliance [qi, i.e.,] dryness and metal, is at the fountain, the first half of that year is disproportionately hot, while the second half is disproportionately cool. In the time period associated with the fourth qi the major yin [qi, i.e.,] dampness and soil, is in charge both as host qi and as visitor qi. Hence, because in this time period cold and heat arrive together, at times it is cold, at times it is hot, and dampness qi is disproportionately dominant. [People] may be affected from the outside by cold and dampness or by dampness and heat with the conditions listed here emerging as a result.”

# Stagnate
50 Su wen 58 has “The large meeting points of flesh are the valleys; the small meeting points of flesh are the ravines. It is in the parting of the flesh where the ravines and valley meeting points are located.” 955/35: “谿谷 is the location in the flesh where water flows and stagnates. Hence in case of diseases affecting the spleen, these ‘ravines’ are influenced and edemas develop. li nian’e commented: ‘谿 is where the water flows and stagnates.’ ”

41 Wang Bing: “When cold dominates, then the yin qi congeals in the dark palaces [i.e., in the pores; see Su wen 61 and 62]. When the dark palaces are tightly closed, the yang qi attacks them from the inside. Hence swelling results.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /37: “ ‘When cold dominates, then there is swelling’ refers here mainly to yang depletion with internal cold. The qi is transformed and does not move, with the result that the water stagnates and causes surface swelling.”

48 Wang Bing: “Because the yin controls the blood.” Zhongyi yanjiuyuan...: “evil qi conglomerates in the yin conduits. When the yin network vessels receive harm, blood passes down with the stools.” Cheng shide et al.: “The Sheng ji zong lu 聖濟總錄 states: ‘In case of evil [qi] in the five depots, the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious. When the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious, then bloods stagnates in it. Diseases of conglomerated yin result from internal conglomerations of yin qi, keeping it from moving outside. Blood enters the intestines. Hence there is blood in the stool.’ Conglomeration of yin is to say, then: conglomeration of blood in the yin vessels. Zhang Jiebin stated: ‘In mild cases the stool has one pint of blood. This way the conglomeration evil is set free. If not and if there is a second conglomeration, then the stool has two pints. (etc.)’”

52 Wang Bing: “This is to say, the vessels of the spleen and of the lung are both [af- fected by] cold conglomerations. When spleen and lung have cold conglomerations, the qi is transformed into water.” see also 94/52 for an identification of “water” as “edema,” following the statement in Su wen 74: “all instances of swelling and fullness because of dampness are associated with the spleen.” 983/35: “When spleen and lung are affected by conglomerations, they are unable to move and to transform the liquids. [as a result], the water qi stagnates and this causes a large swelling.”

16 Wang Bing: “The heart is related to the [movement in the] vessels; its splendor appears in in the complexion. salty [flavor] benefits the kidneys, [and makes them] dominate the heart. The heart cannot prosper. Hence the [movement in the] vessels congeals and stagnates and the complexion changes.” Zhang Jiebin: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ” Zhang yizhi et al.: “泣 is identical to 立, ‘to stand.’ The character 泣 is an error here; it should be 立.”

71 Wang Bing: “When the disease qi stagnates, when the physical appearance is lean and when the signs [of the disease] do not change, then follow the rhythm of [the patient’s] breathing and apply a nourishing piercing.” Cheng shide et al.: “留 is: the evil qi stagnates. .. 不移 is to say: the disease evil does not move. 節 is 層次, ‘levels.’ another opinion identifies 節 as ‘joints.’ ” for example, Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever a disease evil stays for long and does not move, there must be accumulations in the eight folds of the four limbs. Hence one must search for them at the locations of the joints and needle there. This way the [qi] can be regulated.” Zhang Zhicong: “When a dis- ease is in the vessels and network [vessels], take it from the vessels; when a disease is in the bones and joints, treat the joints.” 2284/60: “瘦 should be 廋, ‘to be concealed.’ ” for details of this argument, see there. 

23 Wang Bing: “Cold causes the qi to stagnate and obstruct [the vessels].”

41 Wang Bing: “When evil settles in the yang vessels, heat abounds in the four limbs. This results in craziness. When the evil enters the yin vessels then the [con- tents of the] six vessels coagulate, stagnate and [their flow] is blocked. Hence a block results.”

11 Wang Bing: “ ‘The mind is joyful’ is to say: one rejoices and forgets all grief. Howe- ver, when the sinews and bones are not taxed and when heart and spirit rejoice, the structures of the flesh narrow down and the passageways of the qi become filled up. The guard qi becomes disquieted and forms knottings. Hence the diseases emerge in the flesh. now, when the guard qi stagnates and fills [the flesh] it is to be drained by means of needles. Knotted accumulations of pus and blood are to be broken up with stones. ‘stones’ is to say: stone needles. These are sharpened stones.” see also Su wen 04, note 37.

14 lin yi et al.: “The Jia yi jing has 固竭, ‘chronic exhaustion,’ instead of 咽嗌, ‘gul- let and throat,’ and 甘藥, ‘sweet drugs,’ instead of 百藥, ‘the one hundred drugs.’ ” Ling shu 78, too, has 甘藥, “sweet drugs,” instead of 百藥. Zhang Jiebin: “甘, ‘sweet,’ in former times was written 百. The Ling shu is correct. Hence [I] follow it.” Wang Bing: “When one is engaged in serious studies and toils in one’s profession, when one ponders and has deep thoughts, or when one is grieved, then the liver qi accu- mulates in the spleen. The lung and the gallbladder form a union; the throat serves as their emissary. Hence the diseases emerge from the throat.” Zhang Zhicong: “To have the physical appearance and the mind suffer, there must be a lot of grief and think- ing. Grief harms the lung, thoughts harm the spleen. Harm to the lung qi results in depletion and failure of passage. The qi must stagnate. The vessels of spleen and lung move upwards along the throat. Hence diseases emerge at the throat.” Zhang Zhi- cong: “When physical appearance and mind suffer, this is to say: one hundred griefs affect the heart, ten thousand matters tax the physical appearance. as a result, yin and yang, blood and qi are harmed. now, the throat rules the qi of heaven; the gullet rules the qi of the eart. [The qi of ] heaven is the yang qi; [the qi of the] earth is the yin qi. Here now yin and yang, qi and blood are all harmed. Hence the disease emerges in the throat and in the gullet.”

15 Wang Bing: “絡 elsewhere is 經, ‘conduits.’ That is wrong. Blood and qi are abun- dant. 留 elsewhere is 流, ‘to flow.’ This is incorrect.” 2107/56: “The character 血, ‘blood,’ is a repetition of the previous character 血. Tai su ch. 24, 天忌, has 絡有留止, ‘the network [vessels] have resident and stagnating [blood and qi].’ The character 血, ‘blood,’ is a mistake for the character 止, ‘to stop,’ ‘to stagnate.’ ”

5 Wang Bing: “ ‘Wind Palace (風府)’ is the name of a hole [used for piercing]. It is lo- cated above the nape one body-standardized inch into the hair line.” Guo Tian: “The ‘Wind Palace’ is a hole on the supervisor vessel. ‘supervisor’ is ruler. The supervisor vessel rules all yang vessels. Hence the Wind Palace is the meeting point of all yang. The major yang is the meeting point of all the yang and it rules the camp and the guard qi. Its physiological function is to ward off wind and cold.” Hua shou: “The 21 characters from 巨陽者 to 諸陽主氣也 should be moved to behind [the passage] 傷 寒一日, 巨陽受之.” Cheng shide et al.: “These 21 characters are a commentary to the statement ‘all heat diseases belong to the group of ‘harm caused by cold.’’ This is to say, the major yang rules the qi of all the yang [conduits]; it oversees the exterior of the entire body. When cold evil attacks the outside, it will harm first the major yang. When the major yang has received the evil, the muscles and the exterior are closed firmly and the yang qi cannot disperse. Hence it stagnates and causes heat.”

20 Wang Bing: “The foot ceasing yin vessel .. encircles the yin organ and reaches into the lower abdomen. Hence the disease appears as is [outlined in the text]. 癃 is to say: one cannot pass urine. 悒悒 is 不暢, ‘not joyous.’ ” SWJZ: “悒 is 不安, ‘uneasy.’ ” Zhang Zhicong: “The wood rules the qi generated in spring. When the ceasing yin [vessel] has received evil [qi], the vital qi is insufficient. The wood stagnates and can- not reach out. Hence there is uneasiness in the abdomen.” see also 2167/48.

When cold qi stagnates and the heat qi follows [the cold qi] upwards,19 then the vessels are full and big and both the blood and the qi are in disorder. Hence, the pain is extreme and [the vessels] cannot be pressed.20

When cold qi settles in the region between the small intestine and the mem- brane plain, in the blood of the network [vessels], the [flow of the] blood is impeded and cannot pour into the large conduits. The blood and the qi stagnate and cannot pass. Hence, [the blood and the qi] stay [at one location] for a long time and generate ac- cumulations.31

19 Wang Bing: “above [the liver vessel] pulls the lower abdomen, [creating a feeling] as if one were pregnant.” Wu Kun: “When cold dominates, then the sinews shrink and become tense. Hence, above and below are pulled together, as if one carried some- thing in one’s bosom.” Cheng shide et al.: “all authors interpret 引 in the sense of ‘to pull.’ However, a ‘pulling’ syndrome appears unrelated to the appearance and feeling generated by a pregnancy. Hence, all these comments appear to be forced. now, the character 引 can be used as an adjective, as for instance in the expression 引滿之弓, ‘a bow stretched to the full.’ The Shuo wen interprets 引 as ‘to stretch a bow.’ 引如懷, then, is to say: the abdomen is bloated like a fully stretched bow, resembling a preg- nancy. The reason is that because of the disease of liver block, the qi flow is impeded and the liquids stagnate. This condition manifests itself as a distented abdomen.” The Tai su has 演, “to widen”, instead of 引如.

19 Wang Bing: “That is to say, even though in each case one speaks of an abscess in the neck, but they differ in the skin; they are not of the same type. Hence, the subse- 682 Huang Di nei jing su wen now, in the case of a yong-abscess, the qi stagnates [at one place]. one must open it with a needle to eliminate it. now, when the qi abounds and blood has collected, one must drain it with a stone. This is what is called ‘different treatments for identical diseases.’ ”20

32 Wang Bing: “When the food is fat, then the interstice structures close tightly and the yang qi cannot flow away towards the outside. Hence, fat lets one be hot inside. The nature and the qi of sweet [taste] are harmonious and relaxed and dispersing. Hence, in case of counterflow, sweet [flavor] causes one to have [a feeling of ] fullness in the center.” Zhang Qi: “If one’s diet is fat, then the qi stagnates and cannot penetrate [the body]. If one’s diet is sweet, the central qi is slowed down [in its movement] and tends to rest [at one location]. Hence, the center [exhibits a feeling of ] fullness.”

6 Wang Bing: “When qi and blood undergo changes (變易), unilateral withering is the result.” yao shaoyu: “That is to say, when the kidney qi is blocked, one suffers not only from distension and fullness below the upper flanks; in addition, both feet are affected by limping which changes into unilateral withering. The kidneys are the source of the vital qi. Hence, when they are congested, the qi congeals and the blood stagnates. The resulting disease is as is described here. The [portion of the leg] above the knee is the 髀, the [portion of the leg] below the knee is the 䯒. 脛 is identical with 䯒.” Cheng shide et al.: “大小 is to say: the two lower limbs differ in size. 易 is to say: sometimes [the unilateral withering develops] on the right, sometimes on the left.” Hu Tianxiong: “Wang Bing’s interpretation is wrong; all diseases can be said to result in changes of blood and qi, not only unilateral withering! one must read the four characters 跛易偏枯 as one sentence and one should follow sun yirang in read- ing 跛易 as 跛弛, ‘at ease,’ ‘slack.’ ” Su wen 7 has 三陽三陰發病為偏枯痿易. NJCD: “易 is identical with 㑊 , ‘slack.’”

28 Wang Bing: “When the water stagnates below, then the qi accumulates above. When the qi accumulates above, then the lung is full. Hence, the chest aches and is short of qi (i.e., of breath).” Zhang Jiebin: “This is the yin of water evil, it is not true yin. yin evil is in the center and this causes chest pain. When the yin abounds, then the yang weakens. Hence, one is short of qi. When one is short of qi, then the qi (i.e., the breath) is short and one pants.” 

10 Wang Bing: “a loss of blood results in blood depletion. When the blood is de- pleted, then the qi abounds internally and is transformed into body liquids which flow downwards into the lower burner. Hence, [the text] states: ‘dampness resides in the lower [section of the body].’” Ma shi: “If grain enters [the body] in large quantities and − contrary [to what one should expect] − qi is present in small quantities [only], this is because [the patient] has lost blood. When too much blood was lost, then the qi is diminished [too]. also, dampness resides in the lower [section of the body]. If this dampness dominates, then the conduit vessels are blocked and this, too, causes a decrease of qi.” Cheng shide et al.: “When the spleen loses its ability to transport, water-dampness stagnates internally. The nature of dampness is heavy and turbid; it flows down into the lower burner. Hence, ‘dampness resides in the lower [section of the body].’”

12 Wang Bing: “飲 is to say: 留飲, ‘stagnant beverages.’ When beverages stagnate in the spleen and/or in the stomach, then the spleen qi overflows. When the spleen qi overflows, then this causes heat in the center.” Tanba agrees.

58-301-6 When the camp and the guard [qi] stagnate, when the guard [qi] disperses and when the camp [qi] overflows, and when the qi is exhausted and the blood is stuck,43 then externally this causes the development of heat and internally this causes one to be short of qi.44 Then drain quickly; do not lose any time to free the passage of the camp and guard [qi]. Drain it where it appears; do not care about the meeting points.”45

43 Hu Tianxiong: “This may be a comment written in the margins of the text that was later erroneously inserted into the main text. When ‘the guard [qi] is dispersed,’ then ‘the qi is exhausted.’ When ‘the camp [qi] has flowed off,’ then the blood is stuck.”

44 Zhang Zhicong: “The blood and the qi of the great network [vessels] appear out- side in the skin, and they meet with the tertiary network [vessels]. Hence, the guard [qi] outside of the vessels and the camp [qi] inside the vessels interact with each other in the tertiary network [vessels] in the skin. The tertiary network [vessels] pass through the skin outside and they connect with the conduit vessels inside to pass the camp and the guard [qi]. Hence, when evil settles in [the tertiary network vessels], then the camp and the guard [qi] are impeded in their flow. They cannot interact and do not move. as a result, the qi is exhausted and the blood stagnates. When evil qi is present in the external section, then this causes fever and the proper qi is impeded in its flow. Inside this causes shortness of qi.”

45 Wang Bing: “When the camp [qi] accumulates and the guard [qi] stagnates and when inner and outer fight each other, then this will become evident in the blood network. at this time one must drain them immediately, without asking where the transportation [holes] and meeting points of the vessels are.” Zhang Zhicong: “one must drain quickly and not lose any time, to free the passage of the camp and of the guard qi. one pierces to drain at locations where one sees that blood stagnates and that the color has changed. one does not ask where the transportation holes and the meeting points are.”

49 Wang Bing: “When it stagnates in the bone junctures, which is a location where liquids are retained, then the marrow and the liquids in the bone junctures will rot and turn into pus. Hence, destruction of the sinews and bones is inevitable and one will not be able any longer to bend or stretch [them].”

5 Wang Bing: “The 關 is that by which one controls leaving and entering. The kid- neys rule the lower burner. The bladder is its palace. It controls the [kidneys’] separate outflow through the gate openings, [i.e.,] the two yin [openings.]. Hence, when the kidney qi undergoes transformation, then the two yin [openings] are passable; when the two yin [openings] are closed, then the stomach fills up to fullness. Hence, [the text] states: the kidneys are the gate of the stomach. When the gate is closed, then water collects. When water collects, then the qi stagnates. When the qi stagnates, then water is generated. When water is generated, then the qi overflows. Qi and water are of the same type (同類). Hence, [the text] states: ‘When the gate is closed so that there is no free flow, the water accumulates and follows its type.’” Hu Tianxiong: “The Tai su has 關閉不利, ‘the gate is closed, no free flow,’ (instead of 關門不利). If one examines Wang Bing’s comment stating 關閉則水積 and also his comments in Su wen 23, it is obvious that the original text had 關閉不利. lin yi et al. has no editorial comment on this; hence, this is a copy error from after the song.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /14: “ ‘follows its type,’ the kidneys are the water depot; water returns to the water depot. Hence, [the text] states ‘follows its type.’”

18 The Tai su has 分之相輸受者. yang shangshan: “Because the kidneys rule the water and the lung rules the qi, hence, [the text] states ‘divides them.’ The two yin accumulate together, hence, [the text] states: ‘they transport and receive [water and qi] to/from each other.’ 相輸受 is: water and qi are retained and stagnate together.” Hu Tianxiong: “according to the Tai su, this passage 分為相輸 should be linked to the three characters 俱受者 below. yang shangshan’s comment is very appropriate. Because the lung moves the qi it controls to the kidneys and because the kidneys move the water they control to the lung, hence, ‘the parts transport (water and qi) to each other.’” for a detailed discussion of 水氣 as “water qi,” see 59/10.

19 Ma shi: “The two conduits form separate parts which originally transport [qi] to each other and correspond to each other. When they both receive this disease, it is because water qi stagnates [in them].”

68 Wang Bing: “When the disease is transmitted misleadingly and pulls on the upper teeth and in case the teeth and lips are cold and have pain, pierce the yang brilliance network on the back of the hand.” Zhang Zhicong: “one must first inspect the vessels on the back of the hand and eliminate the [blood] from those where blood stagnates. This is to drain evil from the branches of the hand yang brilliance conduits.”

544 Zhang Jiebin: “all these are illnesses caused by cold and water. fire fears water. Hence the heart aches. Cold enters the kidneys. Hence the lower back and the but- tocks have pain. Qi and blood stagnate under the influence of cold, sinews and vessels become tense. Hence the joints do not move freely, stretching and bending are not comfortable. The yin qi dominates and the yang qi fails to move. Hence [patients experience] recession with countermovement, blockages and hardenings, as well as abdominal fullness.”

# Stuck

# Stasis
377 Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./117: “That is, even though there are signs of diar- rhea, drugs causing diarrhea are employed nevertheless. When heat evil has accumu- lated in the intestines, it is drained by [drugs] stimulating a passage downward. as soon as the heat has left with cold drugs draining it downward, the diarrhea comes to an end.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /60: “for example, [uterine] flooding and spotting caused by stagnating blood are to be treated by patterns transforming sta- sis.”

# Stagnating
33 Wang Bing: “高 is 膏, ‘fat.’ 梁, ‘beam,’ is 粱, ‘delicious food.’ When people without forbearance sweat profusely, [the sweat] will form knots and generate swellings and pimples. People who are used to rich food internally often have stagnating heat. Their skin is thick and their flesh is tightly sealed. Hence [the heat/sweat] changes to boils internally. .. The reason why boils emerge on the feet is that the four extremities are the sources of all yang. Because of an excessive waste of [yang qi] in the lower [regions, that is, the feet], the evil [qi] poison attacks the depleted area.” lin yi et al. criticized Wang Bing: “When boils emerge, they are not often located on the feet. When rich food undergoes changes. large boils develop everywhere, not only on the feet.” (see Qian Chaochen-88/152.) Qian Chaochen-90/63: “足 is an adverbial modifier in this sentence. It is to indicate that large boils generate often; it does not say that large boils grow on the feet. When Wang Bing identified 足 as ‘feet,’ this was wrong.” 706/40: “姚止庵 of the Qing dynasty has commented ‘足生 is 足以生丁毒, ‘it is quite suf- ficient to generate boil poison.’ This is in perfect agreement with the general meaning of the text.” 1580/3: “足 stands here for 多, ‘many [times].’ 丁 stands for 病, ‘disease.’ 大丁, then, should refer here to heat signs. The meaning is: ‘In case rich food under- goes changes, often heat signs are generated.’ ” Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./63: “高 equals 膏. fat meat is called 膏. Good nutrition is called 梁. 高梁 stands for delicious food.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/198: “丁 is 疔, ‘boils.’ ”

136 Wang Bing: “決 is to say: 決破其血, ‘to cut the [patient’s] blood.’ Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /58: “ ‘When the blood is replete’ refers to signs of stagnating blood. 決 is to dissolve blockages in water; here it refers to methods transforming or breaking up stagnations.” In contrast, Gao Jiwu/13 interprets 決之, lit. “to cut off,” as a reference to bloodletting. see also Gao Jiwu/158 for further support of this argument. In contrast, Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./115: “one must stimulate the movement of the blood to eliminate the evil.”

34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there are obstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

15 Wang Bing: “絡 elsewhere is 經, ‘conduits.’ That is wrong. Blood and qi are abun- dant. 留 elsewhere is 流, ‘to flow.’ This is incorrect.” 2107/56: “The character 血, ‘blood,’ is a repetition of the previous character 血. Tai su ch. 24, 天忌, has 絡有留止, ‘the network [vessels] have resident and stagnating [blood and qi].’ The character 血, ‘blood,’ is a mistake for the character 止, ‘to stop,’ ‘to stagnate.’ ”

44 Wang Bing: “That is to say: The evil visitor has just arrived and has not found a permanent location yet. When pushing the needle to supplement [qi] at this moment, then [the visitor] is supplemented [too] and will move forward. If one pulls the needle to make it arrive, then it will follow this pulling and remain stopped [at one place]. If one does not cause the abounding blood to leave [the body] and, on the contrary, warms it, then the evil qi will dominate internally and, contrary [to one’s intentions], the harm will be aggravated. Hence the subsequent statement of the text.” Zhang Jiebin: “When evil [qi] has just intruded into a person, it is near the surface in the network [vessels] and has not settled at a definite location yet. If one pushes it, one can move it forward; if one pulls it, one can bring it to a halt. That is to say, it is very easy to seize it. Whenever one selects the network [vessels], one must take their blood. The evil [qi] leaves from the warm blood. [When the blood is let,] the evil must follow it and disappears. Hence the disease comes to an end immediately. 溫血 is 熱血, ‘heats the blood.’ ” Wu Kun: “溫血 is 毒血, ‘poisonous blood.’ ” Gao shishi: “溫 is identical with 調, ‘to regulate.’ ” Guo aichun-81: “溫 is a mistake for 寫, ‘to drain.’ ” li Guoqing agrees. 2764/22: “The character 溫 should be read as 鬱, in the sense of 鬱積, ‘thick and concentrated.’ ” for details, see there. Mori: “溫 is identical with 熅 and 蘊 in the sense of 郁血, ‘stagnating blood.’ ”

16 Wang Bing: “When the meal is second and the drugs are first, this is called 後飯, ‘eat afterwards.’ .. When one is drunk and taxes one’s strength through sexual inter- course (lit.: through entering the bedroom), then the essence qi in the kidneys is ex- hausted and the monthly affair is diminished and fails to arrive. as a result, bad blood remains in one’s center. When the essence qi is exhausted, then the yin [member] (that is, the penis) is limp and fails to rise and one has no [seminal] essence. When bad blood remains [in the center], then the blood is blocked in the center and does not disperse. Hence, one takes these four drugs before one enters the [women’s] chambers (that is, has sexual intercourse; we read 入方 as 入房). The ancient Ben cao jing 本草經 states: ‘ black cuttlefisch bones, salty flavor, cold-balanced [nature], no toxicity. Main indication: blockage of bleeding of women. Madder, acrid flavor, cold-balanced, slight toxicity. Main indication: disperses bad blood. sparrow eggs, sweet flavor, warm-bal- anced, no toxicity. Indication: strengthens the yin [member] in case of weakness and makes it rise. Provides heat, plenty of [seminal] essence, so that one has offspring. 鮑 魚, acrid flavor, stench, warm-balanced, no toxicity. Main indication: stagnating blood, blocked blood in the four limbs which does not disperse.” 

51 Zhang Jiebin: “ ‘ravines and valleys’ are the locations where sinews and bones meet in the joints. In case of excessive water period, cold is extreme and the qi coagu- lates. Hence such illnesses occur.” fang yaozhong: “ ‘Massive cold’ refers to illnesses of congealing and stagnating qi and blood. ‘ravines and valleys’ are intersections in the muscles and flesh of the human body and they are locations where qi and blood flow.”

164 Cheng shide et al.: “胕腫 is 浮腫, ‘surface swelling.’ 痞飲 is abdominal disten- sion because of stagnating liquid.” fang yaozhong: “胕腫 is 足腫, ‘swollen foot.’” for a detailed discussion of the occurrences of the term 胕腫 in the Su wen and its inter- pretation in most cases as 浮腫, in the sense of edema caused by an accumulation of water, see 1682/42. see also, Su wen 69-405-4.

528 Zhang Jiebin: “all these are illnesses [associated with] dampness and soil. With dampness in the upper and central burners, there is distension in the heart [region] and in the abdomen. With dampness in the lower burner, there is frequent diarrhea. The heart is seized by dampness, hence it has pain. The liver is humiliated by damp- ness, hence the flanks are distended. 䐜 is 脹, ‘to distend.’ noisy [vomiting] is 嘔; [throwing up] things is 吐. 霍亂 is when someone throws up and has diarrhea at the same time, with both his heart and his eyesight suffering from confusion. 飲is 痰飲, ‘phlegm drink (i.e., spillage drink stagnating in the body and assuming a viscosity of phlegm; see Su wen 17-104-2). Dampness qi harms the flesh. Hence there is fu-swell- ing and the body is heavy. all these are pathoconditions resulting from an effusion of dampness evil from the soil.”

205 Wu Kun: “Major yin conducts its policy with dampness; this is treated with bit- ter [flavor] and heat to dry the dampness. sour [flavor] is a transformation [product] of wood; it is able to balance the sweetness of dampness and soil. acrid [flavor] is a transformation [product] of metal; it is able to disperse stagnating dampness and soil.” Gao shishi: “Bitter [flavor] is the flavor of fire; heat is the qi of fire. a treatment with bitter [flavor] and heat supports the qi of soil. In case the qi of fire is unsufficient, [the treatment is] assisted with sour [flavor], because wood generates fire. In case the qi of fire is greatly excessive, [the treatment is] assisted with acrid [flavor], because metal generates water.”

364 Wang Bing: “In view of their generation, there are four categories of diseases. first, internal formation of a disease because of a qi movement. second, external for- mation of a disease without a qi movement. Third, internal emergence of a disease because of a qi movement. fourth, external emergence of a disease without a qi move- ment. examples of [illnesses] that have formed internally because of a qi movement are the following: accumulations, concretions and conglomerations, goiters and tu- mors, peak illness and convulsion. examples of [illnesses] that have formed externally [because of a qi movement] are the following: abscesses, swelling, ulcers, sores, scabies, piles, red eyes, fu-swellings, and itch. examples of [illnesses] that emerge internally without a qi movement are the following: stagnating drink, outflow of [undigested] food, harm due to hunger, overeating, or exhaustion, food staying in the body over- night, cholera, sadness, fear, joy, anger, longing and depression. examples of [illnesses] that emerge externally without a qi movement are the following: various demonic onslaughts, beatings and contusion, affections by wind, cold, summerheat and dampness, shots and stabbings, and falls. among these four categories are those where a cure is achieved through a treatment directed solely at the interior or at the interior too, and those where a cure is achieved through a treatment directed solely at the exterior, or at the exterior too. There are cases which are cured in that first the exterior is treated and then the interior, and there are cases which are cured in that first the interior is treated and then the exterior. In some cases one must rely on poison and launch an attack, and there are other cases where one must not rely on poison and regulate instead. for all these approaches, the prescriptions to be applied may be heavy or light, slow or urgent, contracting or dispersing, moistening or drying, softening or hardening. The views and ideas of the prescription masters differ; everybody has his own ideas.”

377 Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./117: “That is, even though there are signs of diar- rhea, drugs causing diarrhea are employed nevertheless. When heat evil has accumu- lated in the intestines, it is drained by [drugs] stimulating a passage downward. as soon as the heat has left with cold drugs draining it downward, the diarrhea comes to an end.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /60: “for example, [uterine] flooding and spotting caused by stagnating blood are to be treated by patterns transforming sta- sis.”

# Blood
61 Wang Bing: “The heart nourishes the blood; it rules the [movement in the] ves- sels. Hence [the text states]: ‘Its fullness [manifests itself ] in the blood vessels.’ ” In contrast, yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/37: “Because the heart rules the blood and the vessels, the heart is able to cause fullness and repletion in respect of the blood and its vessels.”

31 Wang Bing: “衃血 is to say: rotten, coagulated blood; its color is red-black.” SWJZ: “衃, this is coagulated blood.”

42 Wang Bing: “The vessels are the palaces of the blood. Su wen 23 states: ‘If one beholds [something] for long, this harms the blood.’ from this it is evident that all vessels are tied to the eyes.” Gao shishi: “The five depots are located in the interior and the qi passes through the entire body. ‘all vessels’ refers to the vessel paths by which the blood vessels pass through the entire body. The essence brilliance of the five depots moves upwards and pours into the eyes. Hence all vessels are tied to the eyes.” Wu Kun: “To prove this with the [courses of the] conduit vessels: The vessels of the blad- der emerge from the inner canthi. The vessels of the stomach interconnect with the eyebrows. The vessels of the gallbladder emerge from the outer canthi. The vessels of the triple burner reach to the outer canthi. also, the vessels of the heart are connected with the eye connection; the vessels of the liver are linked to the eye connection. That is, all vessels are tied to the eyes.” 137/15: “The character 目 should be 腎, ‘kidneys.’ ” Zhang yizhi et al.: “屬于目 is 注于目, ‘[all vessels] pour into the eyes.’ ”

45 Wang Bing: “The blood resides inside the vessels; it is tied to the heart. Su wen 26 states: ‘Blood and qi are man’s spirit. The spirit, though, is the ruler of the heart.’ from this it is evident that all the blood is tied to the heart.” 

48 Wang Bing: “The liver stores the blood; the heart makes it pass. When a person moves, the blood travels through all the conduits. When a person rests, the blood re- turns to the liver depot. Why this is so? Because the liver rules the sea of blood.”

When someone has lied down and then walks out and wind blows at him and when the blood congeals in the skin, this is block.51 When it congeals in the vessels, this is retarded flow.52 When it congeals in the feet, this is receding [qi].53 In these three cases, the blood has passed but cannot return to the void it [has left].54 Hence [this] leads to block and receding [qi].

50 Wang Bing: “When the qi passes, the blood flows. Hence one can walk when the feet receive blood.”

52 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: the passage of the blood is not free.” Zhang Jiebin: “When wind and cold attack [the body] from outside, the blood coagulates in the vessels. as a result the vessel paths are blocked and this means disease.” 2685/45: “The character 泣 has three different readings in the Nei jing. The first is qi and refers to tears. another is identical in pronunciation and meaning with 澀, ‘rough.’ The third is li and refers to stagnation of blood and qi. yu yue 俞樾 suggested that 泣 is an error for 冱, ‘frozen,’ ‘congealed.’ The element 互 constituting the right side of the character was erroneously written as 立.” 2753/61: “泣 is identical to 澀, ‘rough.’ ”

53 Wang Bing: “厥 is to say: the feet are cold because of ceasing [qi].” Zhang Jiebin: “The four limbs are the basis of all yang. When wind and cold settle here and when the blood coagulates in the feet, then the yang weakens and the yin flourishes. at the same time, the qi moves [upwards] contrary [to its normal course] and this is ceasing.” Zhang Zhicong: “When the yin qi and the yang qi fail to interact, this is ‘ceasing.’ The lower parts are yin and the blood is yin. When the blood coagulates in the lower parts, then the yin and the yang of the upper and the lower parts do no longer interact and this is ‘ceasing.’ ” Cheng shide et al./165: “This comment is based on chapter 厥陰 in the Shang han lun 傷寒論.”

54 Wang Bing: “空 [refers to] the paths where the blood flows. These are the large conduit-tunnels.” 916/53: “空 is identical to 孔, ‘hole,’ ‘opening.’ ”

28 Wang Bing: “examine whether the [movement in the] vessels is abundant or de- pleted; observe and estimate the evil and the proper in his sentiments and will and the requirements resulting from the disease being in the depth or superficial and from its being constructive or destructive and then stay with the [appropriate] pattern to treat it.” Xue Xue: “適 is 測, ‘to measure.’ The [movement in the] vessels is the foremost [indicator] of the blood [and the] qi. Hence one takes only the inch-opening to decide about auspicious or inauspicious signs. .. Hence one must observe the [movement in the] vessels.”

33 It remains unclear whether 針石 refers to “needle stones”, i.e., pointed stones, or to “needles and [pointed] stones” reflecting the parallel existence of acupuncture by needling and bloodletting by means of pointed stones during the Han era. see also Su wen 04, 13, and 14.

6 Chen Zhuyou/30 and Huang sanyuan/40: “勝 is 傷害, ‘to harm.’ ” Gao Jiwu/484: “Between 鹽者 and 勝血, the two characters 使人, ‘cause man,’ have been omitted.” 536/33: “鹽 is a mistaken character here and should be 鹹, ‘salty flavor.’ 鹹者勝血 is the same principle as 鹹走血, ‘salty flavor moves to the blood,’ in Su wen 23.” 7 Wang Bing: “When the blood is weak and hot, one tends to develop abscesses and ulcers.”

3 It remains unclear whether 針石 refers to “needle stones”, i.e., pointed stones, or to “needles and [pointed] stones” reflecting the parallel existence of acupuncture by needling and bloodletting by means of pointed stones during the Han era. see also Su wen 04, 11, and 14.

7 Wang Bing: “Their sentiments cast away all thoughts; hence their interior was not troubled by any affects. They eliminated all desires; hence externally they did not have the physical appearance of stretching themselves for officialdom. They quietly pro- tected their true heavenly [endowment] and hence could not be overcome by evil. Hence they just moved the essence and changed the qi and did not rely on toxic drugs, or on invoking the cause of a disease. neither did they work hard with needles and [pointed] stones and were healed [nevertheless].” Zhang Jiebin: “Internally they had no sentimental affects; externally there was no urge or pursuit. Hence [the text] states ‘peaceful and tranquil world.’ When [the world is] peaceful and tranquil, the true [endowment] of heaven is complete and firm; qi and blood are strong and replete and no evil can enter.” 536/34: “It seems that following 移精 the two characters 變 氣 have been omitted.” 移精 parallels 移珍, “to offer/confer precious objects”, which is attested for Han times (see the entry 移珍 in the Han yu da ci dian 漢語大辭典). Harper 1998, 119, states that jing 精 prior to the fourth century B.C. referred to “things that were pure and refined” and that were presented as offerings to the external 

“The physical appearance and the complexion appear outside and are yang, hence they correspond to the sun. The [movement in the] vessels and the blood appear inside and are yin, hence they correspond to the moon.” Zhang Jiebin: “The complexion follows the categories of the five agents and changes in that it may be light or dark. The sun has the ten stems 

Hence, when heaven is warm and when the sun is bright, then the blood in man is rich in liquid and the guard qi is at the surface. Hence, the blood can be drained easily and the qi can be made to move on easily. When heaven is cold and the sun is hidden, then the blood in man congeals and the guard qi is in the depth. at time of beginning crescent moon, blood and qi originate as essence and the guard qi begins to move. When the disk of the moon is full, blood and qi are replete and muscles and flesh are firm. When the disk of the moon is empty, muscles and flesh wane, the conduits and network [vessels] are depleted and the guard qi leaves. The physical appearance exists all by itself own. It is therefore that one follows the seasons of heaven in regulating blood and qi. Hence, when the heaven is cold, do not needle. When heaven is warm, there are no coagulations. When the moon emerges, do not drain; when the moon is full, do not supply. at empty moon, do not apply any treatment. This is called: get a hold of the times and regulate the [disease]. 不審逆從 is to say: they do not examine whether a disease can be healed or not.” 月郭空, “empty moon”, refers to specific days associated with yang heavenly stems within a month.

16 537/26: “following 針石, the character 者 is missing. It should be added in accor- dance with [the corresponding wording in] the Tai su, 知古今篇. 道 is identical with 導, ‘to guide.’ The meaning is: the only effect of needles and stones is to stimulate the blood and the qi. If one hopes to cure a disease, one must also cause the essence spirit to move freely and the mind to be settled in peace.”

20 see Wang Bing’s comment on the term 泣 in Su wen 10: 泣謂血行不利, “泣 is to say: the blood cannot pass freely.”

39 lin yi et al.: “The Tai su has 莖, ‘stem,’ instead of 莝.” Wang Bing: “去宛陳莝 is to say: remove water that has accumulated over long, just as one cannot allow grasses and stems to remain in the body for long.” Zhang Jiebin: “宛 stands for 積, ‘accumula- tion.’ 陳 stands for 久, ‘old.’ 莖 stands for 斬草, ‘to cut grass.’ That is to say, eliminate long-term accumulations of water qi, that is, you wish to eliminate them as if you were cutting grass.” 2767/39: “莝 is the verb and 陳 is the object. This corresponds to the verb-object relationship of 去宛. The entire phrase 去宛陳莝 has the meaning: ‘discard coagulations of blood and eliminate accumulations of water.’ ” This argument is supported in 2767/39 by a reference to the rhyme structure of the phrase. see there for details. Zhang yizhi et al.: “去 and 莝 are verbs; 宛 and 陳 are nouns. 去宛 is: remove blood clots. 莝陳 is: diminish accumulations of water. When the Tai su has 莖 instead of 莝, this is probably a mistake.” Gao shishi: “莝 stands for 腐, ‘rotten.’ 去宛陳莝 is to say: When the body liquids fill the bulwarks, one must eliminate that which has been rotten over a long time.” Zhang Zhicong agrees. for a detailed argument supporting Gao shishi and Zhang Zhicong, see 1446/58+40. see also 305 and 117. 1508/11: “li Jinyong 李今庸 has pointed out: the three characters 去宛陳 originally constituted one sentence. This is a therapeutic pattern of bloodletting by piercing the network vessels. Hence the phrase 宛陳 is associated with blood clottings in the conduits and network [vessels]. But there are other scholars who identify 宛陳 as accumulations of water. either [identification] makes sense.” 1617/35, in a detailed argument, rejects the identification of a three character phrase 去宛陳; 962/58 and 3-748/56 support the identification of a three character phrase and identify 去宛陳 as a reference to an ancient blood-letting therapy. for details, see there. 1506/7 adduces textual evidence from the Su wen and Ling shu to support the blood-letting inter- pretation. a lengthy argument in favor of this interpretation is offered also in Wang Hongtu et al. /199, pointing out the occurrence of a similar phrase 宛陳則除之 in Su wen 54, Ling shu 01, and Ling shu 03. 1595/45: “陳 has the meaning of 陣, ‘to battle.’ It is used here in the meaning of ‘to attack.’ 莝 means ‘rotten.’ Hence the entire phrase means: ‘eliminate accumulations and attack what is rotten.’ ” for a detailed discussion of various previous interpretations see 2864

3 Gao Jiwu/212: “Su wen 15 states: ‘奇恆 [discusses] strange diseases.’ Hence Zhang Zhicong: ‘奇恆 means: different from what is normal.’ Su wen 63 also speaks of 奇病, ‘strange diseases.’ Wang Bing commented: ‘Diseases in the blood network are called 奇邪, ‘strange evil.’’ ” 2262/43: “In the sentence 奇恆者, 言奇病也 there must be some part of the text missing. It should be 言奇病恆病也. 奇 and 恆 are opposites. strange diseases are 奇病, normal [diseases] are 恆病. If during a yang disease one notices a yin [movement in the] vessels, this is 奇; if during a yang disease one notices a yang [movement in the] vessels, this is 恆. The physician needs to recognize, from examin- ing the [movement in the] vessels and the complexion, whether [the disease] is nor- mal or strange and only then does he know whether prognosis is favorable or not.”

6 Wang Bing: “Blood and qi are the spirit qi. Su wen 26 states: ‘Blood and qi are the spirit of man; they must be nourished carefully.’ now, as long as blood and qi follow their proper course, as long as the four seasons substitute each other [in their usual order], as long as the four rulings follow a circular sequence, and as long as the five qi do not usurp each other’s function, under such circumstances ‘the spirit follows a circular movement and does not turn back.’ 回, ‘to turn back,’ is to say 卻行, ‘to move backwards.’ now, blood and qi follow the rulings [of the five agents]; they do not [ordinarily] associate with a move backwards. If they move back, this is acting against normality; if they act against normality, then they turn back and do not continue their circulatory movement. If they turn back and do not continue their circulatory movement, then [the patient] has lost the dynamics of his vital qi. How to explain this? now, when the wood weakens, then the fire rules. When the fire weakens, then the soil rules. When the soil weakens, then the metal rules. When the metal weakens, then the water rules. When the water weakens, then the wood rules. When this [cycle] comes to an end, it begins anew. When this circulation occurs, this is what is meant by ‘the spirit is engaged in a circulatory movement and does not turn back.’ If the wood weakens, and the water rules, if the water weakens and the metal rules, if the metal weakens and the soil rules, if the soil weakens and the fire rules, if the fire weakens and the wood rules, this is what is meant by ‘it turns back and does not continue its circulatory movement.’ ” Zhang Jiebin: “The spirit is the principle of life and death; it is the force that does not cease. as long as the five qi continue their circular move- ment, and do not leave their regular order, the ‘spirit circulates and does not turn back.’ However, once it move backwards, it opposes its normal state and can no longer circu- late. In this case it has lost its power of generating qi.” Wu Kun: “ ‘spirit’ refers to thetrue and principal spirit of heaven. 轉 is to revolve like a handle. 回 is to oppose and to act against. 機 is 樞機, ‘vital power.’ This is to say, as long as the true and principal spirit of heaven revolves like a handle, and as long as there is no counteraction and opposition, the life creating power does not come to a halt. This is like the cycle of [the five agents] wood, fire, soil, metal, and water. When it has completed its cycle, it begins anew. This is [meant by] ‘[the spirit] continues a circular movement and does not turn back.’ If among the five [agents] there is one instance of counteraction and opposition, then this is called ‘moving back.’ a backwards movement blocks further circular movement. The passage of the five agents comes to a halt, and the principle of life is destroyed. This then is the loss of the true vital powers of the movements and transformations of heaven.” Zhang Zhicong: “as for ‘spirit,’ this is the spirit qi of the five depots and of the blood vessels. now, the spleen is a solitary depot; it is the central soil and provides the four side [regions] with moisture. as long as the five depots are supplied with qi, they are involved in a circular movement and there is no turning back. If they oppose [the normal course] and transmit [qi] to that [agent] by which they are overcome, this is [what the text calls] ‘they turn back and do not continue their circulatory movement.’ In this case they have lost the dynamics of mutual gen- eration and circular movement.” 2030/56: “The meaning is: The fact that the periods of resting and dominance of the five agents in the qi of the depots of the human body can parallel, and do not oppose, the progression of the five agents [as it appears] in the four seasons depends on the correct adjustment of the ‘spirit power’ ruling the interior of the human body. Hence, phenomena indicating opposition, backward movement, or reverse circulation, demonstrate that the ‘spirit power’ has lost its proper function, which, in turn, is a sign of life coming to an end.” see also 514 for a discussion of this passage within the context of notions of circulation in early Chinese philosophy. Zhang yizhi et al.: “回 should be interpreted as 亂, ‘disorder.’ ”

18 Wang Bing: “If in case of extreme depletion, one suffers from warmth, the warm qi dries up the essence and the blood internally. Hence [the patient] dies.” Wu Kun: “Persons suffering from warmth have their essence and their blood extremely de- pleted. as a result, there is no yin to overcome the warmth and the heat.” 19 

all cases of block and lameness result from an affection of blood and qi by evil [qi], with evil and proper [qi] being engaged in a fight.”

58 Wang Bing: “When the qi [flow] in the hand minor yin [conduit] is interrupted, then the blood does not flow [either]. When the qi [flow] in the foot minor yin [con- duit] is interrupted, then the bones are no longer flexible. When the bones are hard, then they break and are disclosed above. Hence the teeth [appear to] grow longer and collect dirt. sweat and blood deteriorate and the skin assumes a fatal color. Hence the face is black like lacquer, but not red.” Gao shishi: “垢 is: face and teeth have no luster.” Wu Kun: “The minor yin kidney vessel passes inside the abdomen, hence it causes the abdomen to swell. The openings of the kidneys are the two yin [orifices for passing urine and stools], hence [the kidney vessel] causes their closure. now, in case of swelling and closure, above one cannot eat and below one cannot ease oneself. above and below are blocked; heart and kidneys are separated from each other and death [is unavoidable].”

Qi Bo responded: “The laws of diagnosis [are as follows]. as a rule, it is at dawn,2 before the yin qi has begun its movement, before the yang qi is dispersed, before beverages and food have been consumed, before the conduit vessels are filled to abundance, when the [contents of the] network vessels are balanced, before the qi and the blood move in disorder,3

17-98-6 now, the vessels, they are the palaces of the blood.9

9 Wang Bing: “府 stands for 聚, ‘to gather.’ That is, whether the blood is present in large or small amounts, it always gathers in the conduit vessels and appears there. Hence Su wen 53 states: ‘when the vessels are replete, the blood is replete; when the vessels are depleted, the blood is depleted.’ ” 175/34: “all places where things accumu- late or are stored can be called 府.” see there for a detailed discussion of the meaning of 府 in the Nei jing.

94 Wang Bing: “The complexion [associated with the] liver is green; the complexion [associated with the] heart is red. When a red complexion appears, the corresponding [movement in the] vessels is vast. If a kidney [movement in the] vessels appears, the corresponding complexion is black. Here now a kidney [movement in the] vessels arrives but, in contrast [to what is appropriate] one observes a heart complexion. The reason is an injury, but no blood is visible. If blood is visible, then dampness qi and wa- ter are in the abdomen.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever the sinews and bones are injured, regardless of whether blood appears or not, the blood will coagulate and the conduits will become blocked. When the qi and the blood are coagulated and blocked, the physical appearance will swell and show fullness as if there were dampness qi in the conduits and this will be similar to being struck by water.” Tanba believes that the en- tire passage from 帝曰: 有故病 to 若中水也 does not fit with the preceding and the following text. Hence he assumes that some text was erroneously omitted. Zhang Qi: “The six character passage beginning with 不見血 is an erroneous insertion.” 2855/54: “What connection could exist between ‘blood is already visible’ and ‘dampness?’ 濕 may be an error for 澀, ‘rough.’ for instance, Ling shu 36 has 氣濕不行 and this is 氣澀不行 in the Tai su. also, 已 has the meaning of ‘to eliminate.’ There should be a stop behind 已, with the entire sentence reading as follows: 當病毀傷, 不見血, 已, 見血, 澀若中水也, ‘he should suffer from an injury. If no blood is visible, this can be healed. If blood is visible this may reach a situation where the passage of qi and blood is rough, similar to being hit by water qi.’ ”

8 Wang Bing: “If both during exhalation and inhalation the vessels exhibit three movements, this exceeds [the status of ] a normal person by one half . During 270 stan- dard breathing periods, the qi proceeds by 243 feet. The signs of the disease become apparent because of this [status]. now, the foot-long section is a yin section, while the inch section is a yang section. When both the yin and the yang sections are hot, this is warmth. If only the yang section exhibits a hasty and abounding [movement], then this [is a sign of ] wind hitting the yang. ‘smooth’ is to say: yang abundance. Hence the disease is wind. ‘rough’ is to say: absence of blood. Hence the disease is numbness- block.” Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./106: “ ‘Block’ is a disease where the passage of blood and qi are blocked.” 1484/388: “symptoms of pain and numbness in the muscle flesh and joints resulting from disharmonies in qi and blood caused by affections by wind, cold, or dampness evil.” for a comprehensive discussion of the meaning of 庳 in the Nei jing, see 1801/10.

31 yang shangshan: “虛理 is a location like a city or district. This large network [ves- sel] of the stomach is the location where the five depots and six palaces receive their supplies. Hence it is called xu li.” 2269/37-38: “虛里 is not only ‘a location like a city or district,’ it is a general reference to human habitats which are summarily called 墟 里. In his poem Gui yuan tian ju 歸園田居, Tao yuanming 陶淵明 stated: 暖暖遠人 村, 依依墟里烟. obviously, 墟里 is a general designation for 里巷, ‘villages and lanes.’ earlier commentators have adopted this usage in their interpretations of xu li in the present context. When in this paragraph the large network [vessel] of the stomach is called xu li, that is to say: the large network [vessel] of the stomach penetrates the xu li. In reality this designation refers to the heart. The ancients named the heart xu li be- cause the heart has a left chamber and a right chamber, where it stores large amounts of blood. It constitutes a hollow pathway for the circulation of the entire body. like ‘villages and lanes,’ [the blood] can enter and leave [the heart]. Hence it is called xu li.” (for details, see there) Gao shishi: “The [movement in the] vessels depends on the stomach. The stomach is the center, the soil. Its qi penetrates the four sides. Hence the large network [vessel] of the stomach is called xu li. 大絡 is the network vessel of the stomach. 虛理 has the meaning of 四通, ‘penetrating the four [sides].’ ” Wang Qi: “The xu li is located below the left breast; this is the location of the apex beat.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /55: “other names are 乳根, ‘breast root,’ and 氣眼, ‘qi eye.’ ” see also 1720/14. We consider xu-li to be a transliteration of a foreign term, possibly related to the Greek xulos. see introductory section.

55 Wang Bing: “If there is only a little blood, the vessels are empty and as a conse- quence visitor cold enters. Cold makes the blood liquid coagulate. Hence the color of the vessels is bluish.”

56 Wang Bing: “The foot-long section is a yin region; [the movement in the vessels there] is ruled by the abdomen and the kidneys. ‘relaxed’ is heated center. ‘rough’ is absence of blood.” yao shaoyu: “There are two interpretations of 緩. one is 和緩, ‘peaceful.’ This applies to the situation called ‘the vessels have stomach qi.’ another is 緩弱, ‘tardy.’ This is a situation where the principal qi is harmed and the [movement in the] vessels is insufficient. If seen from this perspective, ‘rough’ is to say: decreased blood, and ‘relaxed’ means, without any doubt, ‘qi depletion.’ even though each of the three sections of the vessels has its characteristics, the foot-long section is often considered the ‘root and basis.’ Hence if [the movement in the vessels] is relaxed and rough in the foot-long section, one knows that the qi is depleted and the blood is decreased and that their root and basis has already received harm.” Cheng shide et al.: “ ‘foot length’ refers to the skin of the foot-long section; when the [movement in the] vessels of the foot-long section is relaxed and rough, the skin of the foot-long section is relaxed and rough [too].” li Guoqing: “尺脈緩澀 should be 尺緩脈澀. This is to say, the skin and the muscle flesh in the foot-long section are relaxed without any strength and the [movement in the] vessels arrives rough, blocked, [i.e.] not un- impeded. all this is the result of insufficiencies of qi and blood.” 475/43 agrees. The structure of the combination of 尺 and 脈 varies in the present and in the subsequent statements. Given the wording 寸口脈 above, 尺脈 may be the original, correct word- ing here. The wordings 尺濇, “the foot length is rough’ and 尺寒, “the foot length is cold”, below may be reminiscences of early difficulties to leave skin diagnosis com- pletely in favor of pulse diagnosis.

60 Wang Bing: “That is to say, the skin in the foot-long section is rough, with the [movement in the] vessels in the foot-long section being smooth. When the skin is rough, the blood is dried up inside. When the [movement in the] vessels is smooth, the yang qi abounds internally. With the blood being dried up and the yang qi being present in surplus, [the patient] sweats a lot and the [movement in the] vessels is as is described here.”

34 Wang Bing: “When the blood vessels are full and hard, this is called: the evil has settled down. Hence they are needled first to let blood. It is only then that [any depletion or repletion] can be regulated. There is no need to enquire whether the disease is an abundance or a depletion. The goal is to balance the qi in the vessels.” Zhang Jiebin: “Whenever there is stagnating blood in the vessels and when there areobstructions, one must first needle [the vessels] and eliminate these obstructions and it is only then that one can regulate any depletion or repletion.” yan Hongchen & Gao Guangzhen/260: “ ‘remove the blood vessels’ is ‘remove the stagnations in the blood vessels.’ Ma shi states: ‘In case of all these diseases there must be an evil. one must first remove the knotted blood inside the vessels to remove this evil.’ ”

67 Wang Bing: “The bones are dried out.” Zhang Jiebin: “The blood and the liquids have been lost completely. [Hence this is to] say: the skin is dried and sticks to the bones.”

Qi Bo: “In case of diseases in the conduits, treat the conduit. In case of diseases in the tertiary network [vessels], treat the blood in the terti- ary network [vessels].68 In case of diseases in the blood and if the body has pain, treat the conduits and network [vessels].69 If the disease consists in an unevenly distributed evil, then carry out a mislead- ing piercing with respect to the vessel affected by the unevenly distributed evil.70 If the [evil] stays [at one place, if the body] is lean, and [if the disease] does not move, pierce section by section.71

68 Wang Bing: “When blood stagnates [in the tertiary network vessels] pierce [the vessels] and let it [flow away].” lin yi et al.: “The Jia yi jing does not have the two characters 孫絡, ‘tertiary.’ ”

72 The Tai su does not have the character 見. It says 以通之, “to make them pass- able [again].” Wang Bing: “結 is to say: the blood is knotted in the network [vessels]. When the blood has been eliminated, the conduits are passable [again].” lin yi et al.: “The Jia yi jing has 以通其氣, ‘to make its qi pass through [again]’ instead of 以見 通之.” Zhang Jiebin: “In case of repletion above and depletion below, there must be a barrier. Hence one must feel [along] the vessels to search for it and one follows the conduits to take it away. one tries to find out those of the network vessels that are blocked by knottings, needles them and lets their blood flow out. When the knottings blocking [the vessels] are eliminated, an open passage will be noticeable.” on the vari- ous recommendations of bloodletting in the Nei jing, see 700/43.

20 Wang Bing: “That is to say, the flow of the qi in the vessels constitutes the big conduits. The qi of the conduits turns upward to the lung to make its court appear- ance there. The lung is the canopy [covering all other depots]. Its position is on high; ordering and rhythm originate from there. Hence it accepts the court appearance of the one hundred vessels.” 2032/4: “肺朝百脈 has been explained, since Wang Bing and later by Zhang Jiebin, Wu Kun, Zhang Zhicong, Gao shishi, and Ma shi as ‘the lung is where the hundred vessels meet.’ .. It should not be interpreted as ‘the hundred vessels meet at the lung;’ it should be understood as ‘the lung [qi] flows toward the blood vessels of the entire body to move the blood and to have the essence qi spread through the entire body.’” for details, see there. 866/3 agrees: “入, 流, 歸, 朝, 輸, 行, and 留, all these are verbs of directional motion; it is impossible that only 朝 could be an exception.” for further details, see there. 1903/19 agrees: “肺朝百脈 is 肺使百脈如 潮, ‘the lung causes the [movement in the] vessels to flow like a wave.’ ” 721/52 offers a detailed argument supporting the identification of 朝 as 潮 in the sense of describing the movement of clouds, water, qi, blood, and other body liquids. In contrast, 1957/28: “This is to say: the blood liquid of the entire body returns, through its passageways, to the lung.” 500/55: “朝 has the meaning of 聚會, 會見, ‘to gather.’ only because the hundred vessel gather at the lung, [the lung] is able to make the qi of the spleen dis- perse and turn upward to the lung. ‘one hundred vessels’ does not mean ‘all the body’s vessels;’ it means ‘many vessels.’ ” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /20: “ ‘one hundred vessels’ refers to all the vessels of the body.” 499/38 opposes the identification of 朝 with 潮. a replique was published in 2466. for most extensive discussions of 肺朝百 脈, see 112/5, 499/39, 2466/54, and 2465/32. also: 848/6 and 2144/15.

109 Wang Bing: “The Way of all needling is such that in the case of depletion, one supplements it and in the case of repletion, one drains it. In case there is neither abun- dance nor depletion, one selects the conduits for treatment. That is to say: [to treat in] keeping with the Way. When there is blood in the conduits and network [vessels], needle them to remove it. That is called ‘protective pattern.’ one must examine the[patient’s] physical appearance and identify the [status of his] qi. first remove the blood [from the] vessels and then balance surplus and insufficiency.”

When the five flavors are to be avoided: The acrid [flavor] moves to the qi; in the case of diseases in the qi one must not consume acrid [flavor] in large quantities. The salty [flavor] moves to the blood; in the case of diseases in the blood one must not consume salty [flavor] in large quantities.33 The bitter [flavor] moves to the bones; in the case of diseases in the bones one must not consume bitter [flavor] in large quantities.34 The sweet [flavor] moves to the flesh

33 lin yi et al.: “Huangfu shi’an 皇甫士安 (i.e., Huangfu Mi 謐) stated: ‘salty [fla- vor] moves first to the kidneys. Here [the text] states: it moves to the blood. [The reason for this discrepancy is:] The kidneys and the triple burner form a union. even though the blood vessels are tied to the liver and to the heart, they nevertheless con- stitute passage ways of the central burner. Hence salt moves to and enters the blood.” In contrast, Ling shu 78 and Tai su 2.4 D (latter part) associate salty flavor with the bones and bitter flavor with the blood. However, Ling shu 63 and Tai su 2.4D (earlier part) list associations identical with those outlined here.

23-152-7 Where the five diseases break out:37 yin diseases break out in the bones. yang diseases break out in the blood.38 yin diseases break out in the flesh. yang diseases break out in winter. yin diseases break out in summer. 39 These are the so-called “the five outbreaks.”40

When the qi is determined, one [can] pierce the [patient].5 Hence, when heaven is warm and when the sun is bright, then the blood in man is rich in fluid,6 and the guard qi is at the surface. {Hence, the blood can be drained easily and the qi can be made to move on easily.} When heaven is cold and when the sun is hidden, then the blood in man congeals so that [its flow] is impeded,7 and the guard qi is in the depth. 26-164-6 at the time of beginning crescent moon, blood and qi originate as essence,8 and the guard qi begins to move.

6 Zhang Jiebin: “淖 is 濡潤, ‘rich.’ When the sky is warm and the sun shines, the yang abounds and the yin is weak. The blood and the qi in man correspond to this. Hence the blood is imbued with liquid and is drained easily. The guard qi is at the surface and moves easily. When the sky is cold and the sun is hidden, the yang is weak and the yin abounds. Hence man’s blood congeals and the guard qi is in the depth. When [the blood] is congealed, it is difficult to drain it. When [the guard qi] is in the depth, it has difficulties to move.” Zhongyi yanjiuyuan...: “淖 has the meaning of 滑 潤, ‘smooth.’ ” yu Chang: “淖液 stands for 潮汐, ‘morning tides and evening tides.’ ” Mori: “淖液 stands for 淖澤, in the sense of 滋潤, ‘rich.’ yang shangshan interprets 液 as 津液; that is wrong.”

8 yang shangshan: “at new moon, the blood and the qi come to life anew. Hence one speaks of 精, ‘essence.’ ” Zhang Jiebin: “精 is 正, ‘regular,’ is 流利, ‘movable.’ 

9 Zhang Jiebin: “The moon belongs to the yin; it is the essence of water. Hence the up and down of the tides corresponds to the moon. The physical body of man belongs to the yin. The blood vessels belong to the water. Hence their [states of ] depletion and repletion and [whether the qi is] in the depth or near the surface, also corresponds to the moon.” Cheng shide et al.: “郭 is identical with 廓. 月廓 is 望月, ‘full moon.’ ” 10 1276/10: “天時 refers to the sequence of the four seasons spring, summer, autumn, and winter.” 11 Wang Bing: “Because the blood is congealed and the guard qi is in the depth.” 12 Wang Bing: “Because the blood is rich in liquid and the qi moves easily.” yang shangshan: “When heaven is warm, blood and qi are rich. Hence one can pierce the [patient] and one must not harbor any doubts.” In contrast, Zhang Jiebin, Ma shi, Gao shishi, and Zhang Zhicong read 疑 as 凝, “to congeal.” Zhang Zhicong com- ments: “When heaven is warm and mild, then blood and qi do not coagulate and flow freely.” Zhang yizhi et al.: “obviously, the version commented upon by Wang Bing had 凝, ‘to congeal,’ instead of 疑, ‘to hesitate.’ ”

18 Zhang Jiebin: “at the time of waning moon, blood and qi are weak. The regular does not overcome the evil. as a result, the evil qi stays in the depth and does not leave. If at this moment one applies the needles, yin and yang [qi] will mingle, true and evil cannot be distinguished and contrary [to one’s intentions] excess evil will rise.”

26 Wang Bing: “If in examining the qi one does not commit a mistake, there will be immediate confirmation/an immediate effect.” Zhang Zhicong: “If one observes depletion and fullness of sun and moon in heaven and movement or calmness of the channels and waters on the earth, to examine whether the qi is near the surface or in the depth and whether the blood has congealed or flows gently, this is the so-called ‘[In piercing one should take] heaven as law and the earth as rule to regulate the [qi of the] body.’ ”

9 Wang Bing: “泣 is to say: 血行不行, ‘the blood flow does not flow.’ ” Zhang Jiebin agrees. Ma shi: “泣 is read 澀, ‘rough.’ ” yu yue and 2588/23: “The character 泣 should be the character 冱, ‘to freeze,’ ‘to congeal.’ ” for detailed discussions of this argument, see there.

now, when evil enters the vessels, if it is cold, then the blood congeals so that [its flow] is impeded. If it is summerheat, then the qi is saturated with moisture.11 When subsequently a depletion evil enters [the vessels] and settles [there], then this, too, is similar to when the main waters are affected by wind: 12 The arrival of the vessel movement in the conduits, at times it, too, rises [like] the ridges [in the fields].13 Its passage in the vessels is continuous.14

44 Wang Bing: “That is to say: The evil visitor has just arrived and has not found a permanent location yet. When pushing the needle to supplement [qi] at this moment, then [the visitor] is supplemented [too] and will move forward. If one pulls the needle to make it arrive, then it will follow this pulling and remain stopped [at one place]. If one does not cause the abounding blood to leave [the body] and, on the contrary, warms it, then the evil qi will dominate internally and, contrary [to one’s intentions], the harm will be aggravated. Hence the subsequent statement of the text.” Zhang Jiebin: “When evil [qi] has just intruded into a person, it is near the surface in the network [vessels] and has not settled at a definite location yet. If one pushes it, one can move it forward; if one pulls it, one can bring it to a halt. That is to say, it is very easy to seize it. Whenever one selects the network [vessels], one must take their blood. The evil [qi] leaves from the warm blood. [When the blood is let,] the evil must follow it and disappears. Hence the disease comes to an end immediately. 溫血 is 熱血, ‘heats the blood.’ ” Wu Kun: “溫血 is 毒血, ‘poisonous blood.’ ” Gao shishi: “溫 is identical with 調, ‘to regulate.’ ” Guo aichun-81: “溫 is a mistake for 寫, ‘to drain.’ ” li Guoqing agrees. 2764/22: “The character 溫 should be read as 鬱, in the sense of 鬱積, ‘thick and concentrated.’ ” for details, see there. Mori: “溫 is identical with 熅 and 蘊 in the sense of 郁血, ‘stagnating blood.’ ”

9 Gao shishi: “The twelve conduit vessels of the human body are the passageways where blood and qi leave and enter. Their flow does not come to a halt; it circulates without pause. When cold qi enters the conduits and the proper qi stops and is re- tarded, then the blood congeals and does not move. The qi moves outside of the vessels and the blood follows it. If now cold [qi] settles outside of the vessels, then the blood is diminished. The blood moves inside the vessels and the qi follows it. If now cold [qi] settles inside of the vessels, then the qi cannot pass. When cold [qi] settles in the conduit vessels, neither qi nor blood can flow and circulate. Hence there is sudden pain.” Zhang Zhicong: “When cold qi settles outside of the vessels, then the vessels shrink and the blood is diminished. When it settles inside of the vessels, then the ves- sels become full and the qi cannot pass. Hence there is sudden pain.”

below the membrane plain,21 and the blood cannot disperse,22 the small network [vessels] become tense and pull and, hence, there is pain. When one presses [the location of the pain], then the blood and the qi dis- perse. Hence, pressing it ends the pain.

22 Wang Bing: “ ‘The blood cannot disperse’ refers to the blood inside the small net- work vessels within the diaphragm membrane. When the network [vessels] are full, they are tense. Hence they pull and pain develops. When one presses them with one’s hand, then the cold qi disperses and the small network [vessels] relax. Hence the pain stops.” The Tai su has 而, ‘and,’ instead of 血, ‘ blood.’ ” Mori: “This passage should be read following the wording in the Tai su. The occurrence of the character for ‘ blood’ in the current version is a mistake. Because Wang Bing used a version with that mistaken writing, he added the character 血 in the subsequent statement.”

39-220-4 When cold qi settles in the ceasing yin vessel, {the ceasing yin vessel encloses the yin (i.e., sexual) organ and is tied to the liver} when cold qi settles in this vessel, then the [flow of the] blood is impeded and the vessel becomes tense. Hence, the ribs in the flanks and the lower abdomen pull each other [causing] pain.27 When receding qi28 settles in the yin (i.e., inner side of the) thighs,29 cold qi rises into the lower abdomen. The [flow of the] blood is impeded in the lower [region]. [above and below] pull each other.

Hence, the abdomen has pain, pulling on the yin (i.e., inner side of the) thighs.30 When cold qi settles in the region between the small intestine and the mem- brane plain, in the blood of the network [vessels], the [flow of the] blood is impeded and cannot pour into the large conduits. The blood and the qi stagnate and cannot pass. Hence, [the blood and the qi] stay [at one location] for a long time and generate ac- cumulations.31

31 Wang Bing: “That is to say, the blood coagulates because of the cold qi and gener- ates accumulations.” Zhang yizhi et al.: “The Tai su, ch. 27, has 卒然, ‘sudden,’ instead of 宿昔. This should be followed.” Mori: “宿昔 stands for 昨昔, ‘yesterday night.’ ”

42 Wang Bing: “When the blood congeals and is impeded, then it turns bad. Hence, the color is green-blue or black and as a result [the patient] feels pain.”

44 Zhang Jiebin: “When the vessel is hard, this is an accumulation of evil. When the blood stays [at one location], the network [vessels] abound [with blood] and rise. When they sink down, [their contents of ] blood and qi is insufficient. These are most- ly yin signs.”

12 Zhang Jiebin: “lüru 藘茹 is also called rulü 茹藘; this is 茜草, ‘madder herb.’ (Rubia cardifolia l.) It stops bleeding and heals uterine bleeding. It also can increase the essence qi, enliven the blood and penetrate the conduit vessels.” The Mawangdui manuscript Wu shi er bing fang 五十二病方 recommends rulu 茹蘆, that is, madder root, against “dry itch.” see Harper 1998, 297. 13 Zhang Jiebin: “雀 is 麻雀, ‘sparrows.’ sparrow eggs can supplement and increase essence and blood.”

16 Wang Bing: “When the meal is second and the drugs are first, this is called 後飯, ‘eat afterwards.’ .. When one is drunk and taxes one’s strength through sexual inter- course (lit.: through entering the bedroom), then the essence qi in the kidneys is ex- hausted and the monthly affair is diminished and fails to arrive. as a result, bad blood remains in one’s center. When the essence qi is exhausted, then the yin [member] (that is, the penis) is limp and fails to rise and one has no [seminal] essence. When bad blood remains [in the center], then the blood is blocked in the center and does not disperse. Hence, one takes these four drugs before one enters the [women’s] chambers (that is, has sexual intercourse; we read 入方 as 入房). The ancient Ben cao jing 本草經 states: ‘ black cuttlefisch bones, salty flavor, cold-balanced [nature], no toxicity. Main indication: blockage of bleeding of women. Madder, acrid flavor, cold-balanced, slight toxicity. Main indication: disperses bad blood. sparrow eggs, sweet flavor, warm-bal- anced, no toxicity. Indication: strengthens the yin [member] in case of weakness and makes it rise. Provides heat, plenty of [seminal] essence, so that one has offspring. 鮑 魚, acrid flavor, stench, warm-balanced, no toxicity. Main indication: stagnating blood, blocked blood in the four limbs which does not disperse.”

18 Wang Bing: “[The term] ‘hidden beams’ [refers to] accumulations in the heart. .. The disease is named ‘hidden beams’ because above and below there are hardenings as if there were hidden beams.” lin yi et al.: “This [disease of ] hidden beams is very different from the hidden beams of the accumulations in the heart. These diseases have the same name, but in fact they differ and are not alike.” Zhang Jiebin: “伏 is 藏 伏, ‘hidden.’ 梁 is to say: 疆梁堅硬 ‘violent and hard.’ ” Wu Kun: “伏梁 is to say: like hidden bridge beams. This name was chosen because the suffering is deep inside. The [occurrence of the term] here is not identical with the discourse on ‘hidden beams’ in the Nan jing (difficult issue 56). There it refers to accumulations in the heart, that is., to yin qi in the depots. Here it refers to accumulations of pus and blood, that is, to yang poison.” see also 2822/1. 19 Wang Bing: “Because a package of large amounts of pus and blood is situated outside of the intestines and the stomach, which if pressed results in unbearable pain; whenever it is pressed, this leads to [the patient’s] death.” Zhang Jiebin: “按 is 抑, ‘to press down with one’s hand.’ If one presses it firmly, this is to say, this is an overly wild attack. Hence [the patient] must die.” Zhang Zhicong: “ ‘It cannot be treated’ is: it cannot be treated through pressure or rubbing (that is, massage). If one presses and rubs it because one wishes to disperse it quickly, this will result in pain and [thepatient] may wish to die. That is, any evil with a physical appearance is not easy to disperse.”

49 li Zhongzi: “In the case of cold, the blood qi coagulates. Hence, there is pain.”

Qi Bo: “a block, when it occurs in the bones, then [the body feels] heavy. When it occurs in the vessels, then the blood congeals and does not flow. When it occurs in the sinews, then [the body is] bent and cannot be stretched. When it occurs in the flesh, then [the patient experiences] numbness. When it occurs in the skin, then [the patient] is cold. Hence, if [a patient] has any of these five [diseases], then he feels no pain.

3 Wu Kun: “Below the respiration gate (i.e., the epiglottis) and above the strong gate (i.e., the cardia), the duct which receives water and grains is called ‘stomach duct.’ 癰 is 毒, ‘poison.’ ” Zhang Zhicong: “The camp [qi] and the guard [qi], the blood and the qi, they are generated by the yang brilliance. In case the blood and the qi are blocked and move contrary [to their normal direction], then this is a disease of abscess-swell- ing. It is unlike an affection from the outside by the six excessives of the four seasons, or any internal harm by the five states of mind and seven emotions.”

now, in the case of a yong-abscess, the qi stagnates [at one place]. one must open it with a needle to eliminate it. now, when the qi abounds and blood has collected, one must drain it with a stone. This is what is called ‘different treatments for identical diseases.’ ”20

20 Wang Bing: “息 is 瘜, which means ‘dead flesh.’ ‘stones’ is 砭石, ‘pointed stones.’ They can be used to open big abscesses and let the pus flow out. nowadays, they have been replaced by the sword needle.” Zhang Jiebin: “息 is 止, ‘to stop.’ When in case of an abscess the qi agglomerates, stays at one place and fails to disperse, one treats this by employing a needle to open [the abscess] and eliminate this qi [agglomeration]. When the qi moves [again], then the abscess is cured.” Wu Kun: “瘜 is 腐肉, ‘rotten flesh.’ 針 is 鈹針, ‘stiletto needle.’ It is used to remove rotten flesh.” Ma shi: “Inside an abscess there is qi ‘at rest,’ (頓息) it has not reached its extreme yet. When it is said ‘one uses a stone to pierce and to drain it,’ then this is because the qi abounds and blood has accumulated.” Gao shishi: “氣之息 is 氣之止息, ‘when the qi stops.’ ”

6 Wang Bing: “When qi and blood undergo changes (變易), unilateral withering is the result.” yao shaoyu: “That is to say, when the kidney qi is blocked, one suffers not only from distension and fullness below the upper flanks; in addition, both feet are affected by limping which changes into unilateral withering. The kidneys are the source of the vital qi. Hence, when they are congested, the qi congeals and the blood stagnates. The resulting disease is as is described here. The [portion of the leg] above the knee is the 髀, the [portion of the leg] below the knee is the 䯒. 脛 is identical with 䯒.” Cheng shide et al.: “大小 is to say: the two lower limbs differ in size. 易 is to say: sometimes [the unilateral withering develops] on the right, sometimes on the left.” Hu Tianxiong: “Wang Bing’s interpretation is wrong; all diseases can be said to result in changes of blood and qi, not only unilateral withering! one must read the four characters 跛易偏枯 as one sentence and one should follow sun yirang in read- ing 跛易 as 跛弛, ‘at ease,’ ‘slack.’ ” Su wen 7 has 三陽三陰發病為偏枯痿易. NJCD: “易 is identical with 㑊 , ‘slack.’”

7 Wang Bing: “When the heart vessel is full and big, then the liver qi flows down- wards and heat qi collects internally. The sinews dry up and the blood hardens. Hence, convulsions and spasm result and the sinews are cramped.” Zhang Jiebin: “The heart is associated with fire. When the fire has a surplus, then the vessels are full and big. Their blood dries up. Hence, convulsions and spasm result and the sinews are cramped.” Wu Kun: “an abounding fire generates wind. Hence, this lets one have convulsions and causes one to fall down. one develops spasms and the sinews are cramped.” Gaoshishi: “The heart is where the spirit resides. When the heart vessel is full and big, then the spirit cannot function smoothly. Hence, convulsions and spasm result and the sinews are cramped. When the spirit qi does not penetrate the heart bladder, then convulsions result. When the spirit qi does not reach the joints of the bones, spasms result. In case of convulsions, the sinews are cramped internally; in case of spasm, the sinews are cramped externally.”

8 Wang Bing: “The liver nourishes the sinews; internally, it stores the blood. [In the present case] the liver qi receives cold; hence, convulsions and spasm result and the sinews are cramped. When the vessel is small and tense, this is [a sign of ] cold.” Zhang Jiebin: “The liver stores the blood. When [the vessel] is small, the blood is insufficient. When it is tense, the evil has a surplus. Hence, this disease results. now, convulsions, spasm, and cramped sinews are one identical disease, but the two conduits of the heart and of the liver can both have it. In one case the cause is heat, in the other case it is wind and cold. Cold and heat are not the same, but [their effects in] weakening the blood are the same. Hence, in both cases this disease results.”

11 Wang Bing: “ ‘small and tense’ refers to extreme cold. When there is no drum- ming, then the blood does not flow. When the blood does not flow and when cold gathers, the blood coagulates internally and causes conglomeration ills as a result.” Ma shi: “瘕 is 假, ‘unreal.’ The lump seems to have form; its disappearance or visibility are irregular. Hence, it is called 瘕. The vessels themselves are tense. If now within this tension they are also small and if they do not drum against one’s hand, then they are in the depth. There must be a conglomeration inside.” Mori: “瘕 is a conglomeration, caused be an internal knotting of water and blood. Hence, the [Zhu] bing yuan [hou lun] 諸病源候論 states: 瘕 diseases are caused by an imbalance of cold and warmth. Beverages and food are not digested and they strike against the qi of the depots, form- ing accumulations in the abdomen, with tangible lumps. They move together with the qi and they are named because of their elusiveness. Hence, [the text] states: ‘are [signs of ] conglomeration ills.’ ”Yu pian 玉篇: “瘕 are diseases in the abdomen.”

20 Wang Bing: “When the major yang [conduit] receives cold, the blood coagulates and this is a conglomeration ill. When the major yin [conduit] receives cold, the qi accumulates and this is elevation illness.”

3 Wang Bing: “ ‘If one moves beyond [the necessary], then [this results in] internal harm’ because [one had pierced] too deep. ‘If one stays short [of the necessary], then [this] generates external congestion’ because one has unreasonably enriched the qi of another section. When the qi is enriched so that external congestion results, evil qi will move to the depleted [region].” Zhang Jiebin: “If one [pierces] too deep, then this harms the qi in the interior. If [the piercing] is erroneously shallow, then this brings the qi to the outside. Hence, congestion-swelling results and the evil, contrary [to one’s intentions] moves there.” Zhang Zhicong: “In case of 壅 the blood and the qi do not move.” Cheng shide et al.: “壅 is 阻塞, ‘ blockage.’ ”

26 Wang Bing: “These are the vessels of the gallbladder and of the stomach located on the qi street. The gallbladder vessel follows the inside of the flanks and appears at the qi street. The vessel of the stomach passes on both sides of the navel and enters into the qi street. Its branch course emerges from the lower opening of the stomach and moves inside the abdomen until it reaches into the qi street where it merges [again with the main course]. If it is pierced as [outlined] here and no blood leaves, then the qi in the blood vessel has gathered inside. Hence, internal knottings occur, resulting in a swelling assuming the shape of a hidden mouse. The qi street is located in a distance of four inches on both sides of the navel below the abdomen. It is the moving vessel that can be felt with one’s hand one inch above the ‘attached mouse’ (鼠僕.)” lin yi et al.: “another version has 鼠鼷, (lit.: ‘mouse,’ here: ‘groin’) instead of 鼠僕. a com- mentary to Su wen 59 states: ‘ The qi street is located one inch above the groins at the two ends of the transverse bone (i.e., pubic bone) below the navel.’ ” Zhang Zhicong: “鼠僕 is to say: The swelling is between the groin 鼠鼷 and the subservient Visitor (僕參) [hole].” Gao shishi: “ ‘ qi street’ is the pathway of the qi of the lower leg. If one pierces the qi street and hits the vessel, one harms the foot major yang and yang brilliance conduit vessels. If one harms these vessels in a way that the blood does not leave [the body], then this causes ‘swelling at the shu and pu [holes].’ If one harms the yang brilliance vessels, then the swelling occurs at the groin (鼠鼷); if one harms the major yang vessel, then the swelling occurs at the subservient Visitor [hole].” Tanba: “It is not necessary to change 僕 to 鼷. from [passages in] the Shuo wen, the Jia yi

28 Wang Bing: “Both above and below the breast is the foot yang brilliance vessel. When the milk in the milk chamber flows out, the qi and the blood in the chest come together there from outside [the milk chamber]. That is, when a piercing hits the milk chamber, then qi and blood mingle and amass [there]. Hence, a massive swelling results. Inside is pus rooted in the interior. It consumes the muscles and the skin and transforms them to pus water [resulting in a condition] that lasts long and cannot be healed.” Zhang Zhicong: “根蝕 refers to a painful itching as if an insect was eating up [the breast].” Tanba: “ ‘root’ refers to the root of the milk chamber (i.e., base of the breasts); it is not the Breast root (乳根) hole.” Mori: “跟食 is like 內食, ‘internal consumption.’ There is no need to identify this as ‘root of the milk chamber.’ The signs are those of an abscess in the breast.”

4 Wang Bing: “菀 is 積, ‘accumulation.’ 陳 is 久, ‘old.’ 除 is 去, ‘to remove.’ That is to say, when blood has accumulated in the network vessels for a long time, one pierces [these vessels] with a needle and removes it.” 971/56: “This makes it very clear that the phrase 去宛陳 (in Su wen 14) is a therapy whereby blood is let by piercing the network vessels.” see also 1617/35, 919/1, and 117/38.

58-301-6 When the camp and the guard [qi] stagnate, when the guard [qi] disperses and when the camp [qi] overflows, and when the qi is exhausted and the blood is stuck,43 then externally this causes the development of heat and internally this causes one to be short of qi.44 Then drain quickly; do not lose any time to free the passage of the camp and guard [qi]. Drain it where it appears; do not care about the meeting points.”45

44 Zhang Zhicong: “The blood and the qi of the great network [vessels] appear out- side in the skin, and they meet with the tertiary network [vessels]. Hence, the guard [qi] outside of the vessels and the camp [qi] inside the vessels interact with each other in the tertiary network [vessels] in the skin. The tertiary network [vessels] pass through the skin outside and they connect with the conduit vessels inside to pass the camp and the guard [qi]. Hence, when evil settles in [the tertiary network vessels], then the camp and the guard [qi] are impeded in their flow. They cannot interact and do not move. as a result, the qi is exhausted and the blood stagnates. When evil qi is present in the external section, then this causes fever and the proper qi is impeded in its flow. Inside this causes shortness of qi.” 45 Wang Bing: “When the camp [qi] accumulates and the guard [qi] stagnates and when inner and outer fight each other, then this will become evident in the blood network. at this time one must drain them immediately, without asking where the transportation [holes] and meeting points of the vessels are.” Zhang Zhicong: “onemust drain quickly and not lose any time, to free the passage of the camp and of the guard qi. one pierces to drain at locations where one sees that blood stagnates and that the color has changed. one does not ask where the transportation holes and the meeting points are.”

58-302-11 <Qi Bo: “as for the tertiary network vessels branching out from the conduits, those whose blood abounds and should be drained. {They, too, are 365 vessels.} They all pour into the network [vessels], whence [their content] is transmitted to

Hence, where the qi collects, a depletion of blood develops; where the blood collects, a depletion of qi develops.”47

[Huang] Di: “Man has only blood and qi. now, you, sir, tell me: when the blood collects, this causes a depletion and when the qi collects, this causes a depletion, [too]. Is that [to say] there is no repletion?” Qi Bo: “To be present is repletion; not to be present is depletion.48 Hence, when qi collects, then there is no blood; when blood collects, then there is no qi. If, now, blood and qi lose each other’s presence, then this will result in a depletion.49 Both the network [vessels] and the tertiary vessels transport [their contents] into the conduits. When the blood and the qi collect [simultaneously], then this causes a repletion there.

47 Wang Bing: “When the qi collects in the [region of the] blood, then the blood is diminished. Hence, the blood is depleted. When the blood collects in the [region of the] qi, then the qi is diminished. Hence, the qi is depleted.” 1911/11: “氣并 is 氣偏 盛, ‘the qi abounds unilaterally.’” 48 Wang Bing: “When qi collects in the [region of the] blood, then there is no blood [any longer]. When blood collects in the [region of the] qi, then there is no qi [any longer].” 49 Wang Bing: “When qi collects in the [region of the] blood, then the blood loses its qi. When blood collects in the [region of the] qi, then the qi loses its blood. Hence, [the text] states: ‘Blood and qi lose each other.’” Ma shi: “When the qi collects in the yang [section], then qi is present while blood is not present. That is, the qi is replete and the blood is depleted. When blood collects in the yin [section], then the blood is present while the qi not present. That is, the blood is replete and the qi is depleted.

Qi Bo: “When receding qi74 rises contrary [to its regular course], cold qi accumulates inside the chest and does not flow away. When it does not flow away, then the warmth qi leaves. When the cold [qi] remains alone, then the blood congeals so that [its flow] is impeded. When it congeals, then the vessels are blocked.75 [as a result,] these vessels abound with contents, are big, and rough. Hence, the center is cold.”76

63-347-2 When a person has fallen, when bad blood remains inside, when the abdomen is full and distended and when he can [relieve nature] neither in front nor behind, [let him] first drink drugs freeing the passage.30 In this case the ceasing yin vessel has been harmed above; the minor yin net- work [vessel] has been harmed below.31 63-347-3 Pierce the blood vessel32 below the inner ankle, in front of the blazing bone, to let blood,33 and

30 Wu Kun: “[The patient] should first consume a medication to free the passage of blocked blood.” Gao Jiwu/253 agrees: “Drugs causing the blood to move.”

68 Wang Bing: “When the disease is transmitted misleadingly and pulls on the upper teeth and in case the teeth and lips are cold and have pain, pierce the yang brilliance network on the back of the hand.” Zhang Zhicong: “one must first inspect the vessels on the back of the hand and eliminate the [blood] from those where blood stagnates. This is to drain evil from the branches of the hand yang brilliance conduits.”

71 Wang Bing: “That is to say, [the patient] feels sudden chest pressure and has an ap- pearance like a corpse. The body and the vessels, though, are those of a normal person and move. When yin qi abounds above, then the qi below steams upwards and evil qi rises contrary [to its regular course]. When evil qi rises contrary [to its regular course], then the yang qi is in disorder. When the yang qi is in disorder, then the five networks close and are not passable. Hence, the respective [person] resembles a corpse. Because this [condition] is a result of receding [qi], one speaks of ‘corpse recession.’” Zhang Zhicong: “When all five network [vessels] are exhausted, then the camp and guard [qi] do not move. This, then, lets [the affected] person’s body and vessels tremble and his physical appearance become unconscious. now, a person’s life depends on his breathing qi and on the fluidity of his blood. When blood and qi do not move, then his physical appearance resembles a corpse.” 

33 Zhang Zhicong: “In case of a ‘great block,’ the qi of the depots is depleted and the evil is blocked in the five depots.” Zhang Jiebin: “If at a time when the yang qi lies hidden in storage one pierces the yang section, then the yang qi flows out to the outside. [as a result,] the yang is depleted and the yin dominates. Hence, a ‘great block’ results.” Mori: “ ‘Internal qi flows away to the outside’ is to say: yang qi appears outside. The blood, which is yin, does not move. Hence, this causes a block.” Zhang yizhi et al.: “The character 內 is an error for 血, ‘blood.’ “

Cold harms the blood;102 dryness dominates cold. salty [flavor] harms the blood;

102 Wang Bing: “When the cold is extreme, the blood congeals. Hence it harms the blood.”

51 Zhang Jiebin: “ ‘ravines and valleys’ are the locations where sinews and bones meet in the joints. In case of excessive water period, cold is extreme and the qi coagu- lates. Hence such illnesses occur.” fang yaozhong: “ ‘Massive cold’ refers to illnesses of congealing and stagnating qi and blood. ‘ravines and valleys’ are intersections in the muscles and flesh of the human body and they are locations where qi and blood flow.”

180 Gao shishi: “ ‘outflow’ is: the proper qi is depleted. ‘Deafness and blurred vision’ is: the orifices are not freely passable. ‘Vomiting’ is: [the qi of ] the center, [i.e., of ] soil, is depleted.” fang yaozhong: “怫 is 怫郁, ‘pressed.’ Here it is to say: qi and blood can-not flow freely. That is, qi and blood are blocked in the facial region. Hence it swells and the complexion changes.” for a similar wording, 怫然種, see Su wen 41-230-1.

544 Zhang Jiebin: “all these are illnesses caused by cold and water. fire fears water. Hence the heart aches. Cold enters the kidneys. Hence the lower back and the but- tocks have pain. Qi and blood stagnate under the influence of cold, sinews and vessels become tense. Hence the joints do not move freely, stretching and bending are not comfortable. The yin qi dominates and the yang qi fails to move. Hence [patients experience] recession with countermovement, blockages and hardenings, as well as abdominal fullness.”

628 Wang Bing: “external dryness causes the skin to crack. Internal dryness dries the essence and the blood. When dryness affects the qi and the body liquids, then the flesh dries and the skin clings to the bones.”

blocked, it stays idly in the skin.” Zhang Jiebin: “Wind moves and it changes [its strength and direction] frequently. Hence wind domination causes movement. Ulcers, abscesses, and swellings are fire illnesses When essence, blood, and the body liquids dry out inside and when the skin and the flesh chap and crack outside, then all these illnesses are caused by dryness. When the abdomen [suffers from] fullness and when the body is bloated, then these are illnesses caused by yang insufficiency and cold. 水 閉胕種 is: the water ways are blocked and the muscles as well as the flesh are swollen and dinstended.”

122 Wang Bing: “This applies to jia chen, bing chen, wu chen, geng chen, ren chen, jia xu, bing xu, wu xu, geng xu, and ren xu years. When the major yang [qi] controls heaven, cold qi spreads and transforms. Hence the water freezes and the blood con- geals. Inside the skin the guard qi accumulates, hence ulcers are generated. If [such a situation] falls together with a fire period, then the fiercely flaming fire heat will enter into a fight with the water. Hence violent rainfalls and hail occur, with balls the size of half pearls. The qi associated with the heart is belching. Hence [patients] tend to belch.” Wu Kun: “The water does not rise and the fire does not descend. Hence chest and abdomen are full. The fire is oppressed in the center; hence the hands are hot. The cold resides in the network [vessels], hence the elbows are bent. The heart vessel emerges from the armpits, hence the armpits are swollen. 澹澹, ‘disturbed,’ indicates movement. fire fears the water, hence [the heart] is disturbed and moves strongly. Because of this strong movement, chest, flanks, and stomach duct are not at peace. In case of severe fire the five fluids dry up. Hence [patients] are thirsty and wish to drink. all this is the result of cold evil affecting the heart. Hence [the text] states: these ill- nesses originate in the heart.”

Piles and malaria develop. Cold recession enters the stomach. as a result, heartache emerges internally,152 and there are ulcers in the yin (i.e., the sexual organs). The hidden bend is impeded.153 There is a mutual pulling [between the hidden bend and] the yin (i.e., inner side of the) thighs. The sinews have a cramp and the flesh is numb.154 The blood congeals in the vessels so that [its flow] is impeded. The network [vessels] are full and the color changes. occasionally blood outflow results. The skin is blocked and swollen. The abdomen is full and [patients] eat less. The heat, contrary [to normal], moves upward.

first of all, one must [take into account] the five dominations.360 open [the flow of ] blood and qi and cause their regulation and have them reach [everywhere], to achieve a harmonious balance,’ then this means just the same.”

377 Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./117: “That is, even though there are signs of diar- rhea, drugs causing diarrhea are employed nevertheless. When heat evil has accumu- lated in the intestines, it is drained by [drugs] stimulating a passage downward. as soon as the heat has left with cold drugs draining it downward, the diarrhea comes to an end.” Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /60: “for example, [uterine] flooding and spotting caused by stagnating blood are to be treated by patterns transforming sta- sis.”

45 Wang Bing: “炅 is to say: 熱, ‘heat.’ When the qi of both sinews and vessels is de- stroyed indiscriminately, blood and qi form knottings internally; they stay where they are and do not leave. They collect in the yang vessels and are transformed into pus. When [the pus] has collected in the abdomen for a long time, then [the patient] will feel cold or hot outside.” Zhang Jiebin: “故 is 舊, ‘old.’ That is, if someone was harmed some time ago and if there was destruction and accumulation, blood and qi stay at one place, collect, and do not disperse. as a result there is [local] abundance and this generates heat which turns to the yang section. Hence, pus and blood accumulate andlet the patient have alternating feelings of cold and heat.” Mori: “故傷 corresponds to the phrase 故貴, ‘formerly of noble rank’ above.”

When the second yang [meets with] the third yin, the extreme yin is all present.51 The yin does not surpass the yang. The yang qi cannot stop the yin. yin and yang [qi] are both interrupted. [When the movement in the vessels is] at the surface, this means blood con- glomerations; [when it is] in the depth, this means pus and rotting.52

52 Wang Bing: “a [movement in the] vessels at the surface indicates that the yang qi strikes against the yin. Hence, there are blood conglomerations. a [movement in the] vessels in the depth indicates that the yin qi strikes against the yang. Hence, pus accumulates and [the flesh] rots.”

26 693/38: “The two characters 形氣 are, without any doubt, later amendations; they make absolutely no sense here. With these two characters the role of the three char- acters 陽氣者 as subject of this sentence is lost to 形氣. The [correct] meaning of this passage is that in case of great anger the [flow of the] yang qi is interrupted and blood accumulates above, so that the patient has ‘receding [qi] resulting from pressing [qi].’ The structure is identical with the structure of the passage further above: 陽氣者煩勞 則張.” see also note 23 above.

28 Wang Bing: “This is yet another warning against unrestrained [affects such as] happiness or anger. Their excessive operation causes disease. now, in case of anger the kidney receives harm; in severe cases the [flow of ] qi is interrupted. In case of great anger the qi flows contrary to its normal direction and the yang [qi] cannot descend. since the yang [qi] moves contrary to its normal direction, blood accumulates inside the heart and the chest. ‘above’ refers to the heart and the chest.” 2726/41: “ ‘above’ refers to the brain.”

40 In contrast, Wang Bing: “陷脈 is to say: cold qi causes a deficiency in the re- spective vessels. The cold accumulates and remains there. The blood in the conduits congeals. Chronic blood clots strike against the interior and produce conglomerations in the the flesh structures. Hence this results in a development of ulcers and tumors; flesh and interstice [structures] become (closely) connected.” for 陷脈, see also Su wen 60-325-1.

57 Wang Bing: “薄疾 is to say ‘extremely depleted and rapid.’ 并 is to say ‘abundant and replete.’ 狂 is to say ‘to walk madly,’ or ‘to climb up crazily.’ When the yang is ‘并’ in the four limbs, one turns mad. Su wen 30 states: ‘The four limbs are the origins of all yang. When the yang is abundant then the four limbs are replete. If they are replete one can climb on summits and sing. [The yang abundance causes] heat abundance in the body. Hence one throws off one’s cloths and wishes to run.’ all this happens because the yin cannot overcome the yang.” for comparison, see Su wen 75: 三陽并 至 .. 為巔疾. Gao shishi: “薄 stands for 虛, ‘depleted.’ 疾 stands for 急, ‘fast.’ ” fu Weikang & Wu Hongzhou/259: “薄 stands for 迫, ‘to press.’ 并 stands for 合并, ‘to unite.’ ” Mori: “并 is 并病, ‘accumulation disease.’ That is to say, when the yang qi is replete and accumulates in the section of yin [qi, that is, of ] blood, then this often results in craziness. Su wen 62 states: ‘When the blood collects in the yin [region] and qi collects in the yang [region], fright and craziness result.’ ”

Hence, if one carefully balances the five flavors, the bones are upright,90 and the sinews are soft. as a result, qi and blood flow, and the interstice structures are closed.

21 Wang Bing: “The blood corresponds to water. When it is cold, then water freezes. Because the flow of qi is striking, blockage and receding [qi] result.” Zhang Jiebin: “The cold evil is in the four limbs.” Wu Kun: “ ‘Blockage’ and ‘receding [qi]’ are two different issues. The ‘blockage’ mentioned here is blockage due to cold an

The so-called ‘yin qi’ refers to the essence and to the blood of the human body. essence and blood are the two most precious things; they should be guarded. Hence [the text] states: ‘those who know it remain strong; those who do not know it become old.’ now, essence and blood is one and the same thing, essence is a transformation of blood. Hence [the text] states: ‘equal origin and different names.’ ”

“That is to say, the knowledgable, they know that essence and blood are of identical origin; the ignorant, they believe [essence and blood] to be two separate things.”

136 Wang Bing: “決 is to say: 決破其血, ‘to cut the [patient’s] blood.’ Gu dian yi zhu xuan bianxiezu /58: “ ‘When the blood is replete’ refers to signs of stagnating blood. 決 is to dissolve blockages in water; here it refers to methods transforming or breaking up stagnations.” In contrast, Gao Jiwu/13 interprets 決之, lit. “to cut off,” as a reference to bloodletting. see also Gao Jiwu/158 for further support of this argument. In contrast, Beijing zhongyi xueyuan et al./115: “one must stimulate the movement of the blood to eliminate the evil.”

15 Wang Bing: “隱曲 is to say: ‘concealed and intricate.’ When the intestine and the stomach develop a disease, this is received by the heart and the spleen. When the heart receives it, then the blood does not flow; when the spleen receives it, the flavors are not transformed. When the blood does not flow, females do not have their monthly pe- riod. When the flavors are not transformed, males have less [seminal] essence. Hence they cannot perform those matters that are concealed and intricate.” Zhang Jiebin: “不得隱曲 refers to a disease of the 陽道 (i.e., male member). The stomach is the sea of water and grains, of qi and blood. It controls transformation, construction, and protection and provides the male member with moisture. ... Here now, the source of all transformations has a disease. as a result, the male member is weakened externally. Hence it cannot be secretly bent.” yang shangshan: “隱曲 refers to stools and urine.” Tanba agrees. The Tang dynastic history, 唐書, 安祿山傳, has: 隱曲常瘡, “the private 

47 Wang Bing: “This is because the four limbs are the sources of all yang.” Zhon- gyi yanjiuyuan...: “結 means: the qi and the blood have formed conglomerations and cannot move freely.” fang Wenhui/8: “When evil qi has conglomerated in the yang conduits, the four limbs swell.” 48 Wang Bing: “Because the yin controls the blood.” Zhongyi yanjiuyuan...: “evil qi conglomerates in the yin conduits. When the yin network vessels receive harm, blood passes down with the stools.” Cheng shide et al.: “The Sheng ji zong lu 聖濟總錄 states: ‘In case of evil [qi] in the five depots, the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious. When the [movement in the] yin vessels is not harmonious, then bloods stagnates in it. Diseases of conglomerated yin result from internal conglomerations of yin qi, keeping it from moving outside. Blood enters the intestines. Hence there is blood in the stool.’ Conglomeration of yin is to say, then: conglomeration of blood in the yin vessels. Zhang Jiebin stated: ‘In mild cases the stool has one pint of blood. This way the conglomeration evil is set free. If not and if there is a second conglomeration, then the stool has two pints. (etc.)’”



